arXiv:1905.10495v3 [math.NT] 11 Sep 2020

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES
JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

Abstract. We extend the Serre–Tate theory of canonical lifts of ordinary
abelian varieties to arbitrary unpolarised families of ordinary abelian varieties
parameterised by a p-adic formal scheme S. We show that the canonical lift
is the unique lift to W (S) which admits a δ-structure in the sense of Joyal,
Buium, and Bousfield. We prove analogous statements for families of ordinary
p-groups and p-divisible groups.

Contents
Introduction
1. δ-structures and Witt vectors
2. Further properties of δ-structures and Witt vectors
3. Group schemes, torsors and extensions with δ-structures
4. Canonical lifts of ordinary p-groups
5. Canonical lifts of ordinary abelian schemes
6. Duality and algebraisation
References

1
4
12
22
27
32
36
39

Introduction
Let p be a prime number. Serre and Tate proved that any ordinary abelian
variety A over a perfect field k of characteristic p admits a distinguished lift to
e over W (k), the ring of Witt vectors with entries in k. It is
an abelian scheme A
in fact the unique lift, up to unique isomorphism, which admits an endomorphism
ϕ reducing to the Frobenius morphism modulo p and lying over the Frobenius
endomorphism of W (k). The original reference for this is Messing’s book [25], p.
177.
The purpose of this paper is to extend this to (unpolarised) ordinary abelian
schemes over any p-adic base S:
Theorem A. Let A be an ordinary abelian scheme over S. Then A has a unique
e over W (S) admitting a δW (S) -structure compatible with
lift to an abelian scheme A
its group structure.

The meaning of the terms in this theorem will be explained precisely in the body
of the paper. But we can say a few words now informally. The δ-structures referred
to are those of Joyal, Buium, and Bousfield, generalised to our setting. To a first
approximation, a δ-structure is equivalent to a lift of the Frobenius endomorphism,
but δ-structures are better in that they repair certain problems that Frobenius lifts
have in the presence of p-torsion. (They also happen to be a p-typical analogue
1

2

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

of the λ-ring structures of algebraic K-theory and have other names that reflect
this, such as p-typical λ-structures, Λp -structures, and θp -structures, but we will
not make use of this.) A δW (S) -structure is simply a δ-structure compatible with
the canonical δ-structure on W (S)
The term p-adic above means that the map S → Spec(Z) factors through
Spf(Zp ) → Spec(Z). So if S is affine, it means that p is nilpotent on S. In
general, we allow S to be any sheaf of sets on the category of affine schemes with
respect to the étale topology. In particular, S can be any p-adic formal scheme.
Note however that the passage from S affine to S arbitrary is purely formal. So the
reader can take S to be affine with no real loss in generality. But as usual, allowing
S to be arbitrary from the outset allow us some flexibility at no cost.
Finally, our Witt vector construction W (S) is a certain ind-object colimn Wn (S).
For example, if S = Spec(R), then W (S) is the ind-scheme colimn Spec(Wn (R)). In
that case, an abelian scheme A over W (S) can be identified with a compatible family
of abelian schemes An over the truncated Witt vector rings Wn (R), as n varies, and
a δW (S) -structure on A can be expressed entirely in terms of the compatible family
of An instead of the limiting ind-scheme A. In the special case where R is a perfect
Fp -algebra, W (Spec(R)) can be identified with the usual p-adic formal scheme
e can be viewed as a p-adic formal scheme over Spf(W (R)).
Spf(W (R)) and then A
e will not be p-adic formal schemes.
But in general W (Spec(R)) and A
A consequence of the theorem above is the following one:

Theorem B. The category of ordinary abelian schemes over S is equivalent to the
category of ordinary abelian schemes over W (S) equipped with a δW (S) -structure
compatible with the group structure.
This confirms the philosophy (explicitly stated in [6] and implicit in much of
Buium’s work going back to [11]) that a δW (S) -structure can be viewed as descent
data for the non-existent map W (S) → S.
The proof goes by proving an analogous statement, theorem 4.2.3, for ordinary
p-groups. The corresponding statement for p-divisible groups (remark 4.2.4) is
a formal consequence of this, and then we prove the theorem above by applying
the theorem of Serre and Tate equating deformations of an abelian variety with
deformations of its p-divisible group.
The study of canonical lifts in families began with the papers of Finotti [16],
answering a question of Mazur and Tate, and Erdoğan [14]. In our earlier paper [9],
we observed that in the case of elliptic curves, the canonical lift construction extends
rather formally to arbitrary families. It is worth recalling the approach we took
there in order to contrast it to the one of the present paper.
First, given a δ-structure on a ring A, the universal property of Witt vectors
discovered by Joyal gives a bijection between maps Spec(R) → Spec(A) and δequivariant maps Spec(W (R)) → Spec(A). Viewing Spec(A) as a moduli space X,
one could say that a δ-structure on X provides a theory of canonical lifts for the
objects parametrised by X. (One could reasonably take this as a definition of a
theory of canonical lifts.) Second, if X is flat over Z locally at p, then giving a
δ-structure on X is equivalent to giving a lift ϕ : X → X of the Frobenius map.
Putting the two together, we see that on a moduli space which is flat over Z at p, a
Frobenius lift on the moduli space formally gives rise to a theory of canonical lifts
in arbitrary families.

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

3

This generalises to non-affine moduli spaces X, once one extends the definitions.
It even works without any real complications when X is a stack, still assumed
flat at p, if it admits an étale cover by affine schemes equipped with lifts of the
Frobenius, at least given the étale descent theorems quoted in section 1.5 below.
In particular, if X is the moduli stack of polarised ordinary abelian p-adic formal
schemes, then every such abelian scheme A admits a canonical subgroup CA ⊂
A lifting the the kernel of the Frobenius endomorphism (cf. Adreatta–Gasbarri
[4] where more general canonical subgroups are constructed without the ordinary
hypothesis, generalising earlier work of Katz [19] in the case of elliptic curves). The
functor
X → X : A 7→ A/CA ,
which sends an ordinary polarised abelian scheme to the quotient by the canonical
subgroup is then a lift of the Frobenius, and so the flatness of X implies the existence
of a theory of canonical lifts. This is the approach taken in [9] for the moduli of
elliptic curves. So if we were only interested in canonical lifts of families of polarised
abelian varieties, as in section 6, we could argue as in [9] and dispense with much
of this paper.
But this no longer holds for unpolarised families of abelian varieties because the
moduli stack X is not algebraic. While a δ-structure on X does give a theory
of canonical lifts (once δ-structures on stacks are defined), it is not clear how to
upgrade a Frobenius lift on a non-algebraic stack to a δ-structure. One could
attempt a descent from the moduli stack X pol of polarised abelian varieties to the
moduli stack X of unpolarised abelian varieties. But as far as we know, the map
X pol → X does not have any good descent-theoretic properties which would allow
for a shorter argument than the one we have given here. Indeed, it is certainly far
from being anything like flat in the case of abelian schemes of dimension g > 1: the
tangent spaces of X pol have dimension 12 g(g + 1) while those of X have dimension
g2.
So we construct the δ-structure on X by hand. That said, we prefer to come
full circle and use the more direct language of canonical lifts instead of the more
abstract but equivalent language of δ-structures on the moduli stack. In these
e
terms, the canonical lift A/W
(S) is singled out as simply the unique lift admitting
a δ-structure. Note that this property can be stated without having to refer to the
moduli space, or to any families at all besides the given one. This is in contrast
to the approach of [9] with elliptic curves. There the uniqueness property is only
e where A and S must be allowed to variable.
proved for the functor A 7→ A,
There are essentially two technical points in the proof of our theorem. The first
is an analysis of the deformation theory of ordinary p-divisible groups G/S along
the map S → W (S), which allows us to conclude the existence of canonical lifts of
ordinary abelian schemes from the usual Serre–Tate theorem. The second involves
showing that these canonically lifted abelian schemes, which come with a lift of the
Frobenius by construction, actually have a unique δW (S) -structure.
It is perhaps worth mentioning other possible approaches to the first point
above and the problems that arise when one attempts to use them. First, pdivisible groups are often understood in terms of associated linear algebraic gadgets:
Dieudonné crystals in de Jong–Messing [12] or Lau [22], or slightly different ones
such as the displays and so on used by Zink [30], [31] and Lau [21]. Indeed, such gadgets are much simpler to work with and it is often substantially easier to construct

4

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

canonical lifts of the linear algebraic incarnation of ordinary objects. However,
the relationship between p-divisible groups and the linear algebraic gadgets mentioned above is never perfect. In order to obtain an equivalence of categories, and
hence have anything usable, one must place restrictions either on the base, e.g.
Fp -algebras with bounded nilpotents properties, or on the p-divisible groups, e.g.
formal groups only.
A second approach might be to consider extending the canonical coordinates
on the groups of extensions of multiplicative p-divisible groups by étale p-divisible
groups as in [19]. Indeed, if S is a scheme on which p is nilpotent and Gét and Gmult
are étale and multiplicative p-divisible groups over S, then there is a canonical map
HomS (Tp (Gét ), Gmult ) → ExtS (Gét , Gmult ).

(1)

It is easy to construct canonical lifts of Gét and Gmult to p-divisible groups schemes
over W (S) equipped with δW (S) -structures. This combined with the functoriality of
(1) shows that any extension in its image can be ‘canonically lifted’ to a p-divisible
group over W (S). However, (1) is often not surjective as its image consists only of
extensions which are split on Sred . Of course, one might try to work locally and
descend to this case, but as the Witt vector functor is only compatible with étale
covers and not more general ones (e.g. flat covers) this approach never really gets
off the ground.
One final possible approach is the direct, deformation theoretic method following Nori–Srinivas in the appendix to [24]. However, when one works over general rings A, e.g. any ring which is not a perfect Fp -algebra, the Witt vectors are
substantially less well behaved. For instance, the kernels of the projection maps
Wn+1 (A) → Wn (A) are no longer generated by powers of p, nor are they even
principal, which leaves several of the elementary observations of [24] without any
obvious or useful generalisations. These problems aside, the main lifting result of
[24] relies on projectivity assumptions which we do not make here.
In the final section of the paper, we show that the canonical lift functor is
compatible with duality and polarisations. From this it follows that, in the polarised
situation, the canonical lift can be algebraised:
Theorem C. Let S = Spec(R), where R is a ring in which p is nilpotent, and
e algebraises to a unique
let A/S be an ordinary polarised abelian scheme. Then A
ealg over Spec(W (R)). It is the unique lifting of A/S to
polarised abelian scheme A
Spec(W (R)) equipped with a δSpec(W (R)) -structure compatible with its group structure.
This reduces to Messing’s characterisation of the canonical lift cited above when
R is a perfect field, because for p-torsion free schemes every Frobenius lift comes
from a unique δ-structure. As mentioned above, the second assertion in the theorem
could no doubt be proved directly without developing the general, unpolarised
theory of the rest of the paper. Also note that the affineness assumption on S is
not so much a restriction but an assumption needed to make sense of the question.
Without it, it would not be clear what should play the role of the completed Witt
vector construction Spec(W (R)).
1. δ-structures and Witt vectors
The primary purpose of this section is to define δ-structures on abelian schemes
over Witt vector ind-schemes, or more generally on any sheaf of sets. This is done

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

5

in 1.7. Before that, we recall the basic notions we will need in the theory of Witt
vectors and δ-rings from [18],[11],[10],[7],[8].
The generality in which we work, especially Witt vectors of sheaves of sets,
might strike some readers as excessive. The reason we do it is mainly to give
ourselves a convenient, well-behaved category in which we can perform all limit
constructions without any worries. In principle it would be routine to replace all
limit constructions by compatible systems of schemes. But we have found that the
bookkeeping needed for this is a bigger mental burden than broadening our scope
a bit and using sheaf theory. And at least the sheaf theory keeps the paper shorter.
This is discussed in more detail in the first paragraphs of §2 of [9].
1.1. δ-rings. A δ-ring is a pair (R, δ) where R is a ring (commutative) and δ : R →
R is a map satisfying the following identities:

Pp−1
(1) δ(x + y) = δ(x) + δ(y) − i=1 p1 pi xi y p−i
(2) δ(xy) = xp δ(y) + δ(x)y p + pδ(x)δ(y)
(3) δ(1) = 0
A homomorphism of δ-rings (R, δ) → (R′ , δ ′ ) is a homomorphism α : R → R′ such
that δ ′ ◦ α = α ◦ δ. This structure was introduced by Joyal [18] in his alternative
approach to the Witt vectors, which we follow here, and later by Buium [11] and
Bousfield [10], independently and for different purposes.
If (R, δ) is a δ-ring, then the map ϕ : R → R defined by
ϕ(x) = xp + pδ(x)

(2)

is a Frobenius lift, i.e., a ring homomorphism which reduces modulo p to the p-th
power map. If R is p-torsion free, then the two structures determine each other:
given any Frobenius lift ϕ′ : R → R, there exists a unique δ-ring structure on R
such that ϕ = ϕ′ ; and a ring homomorphism between two p-torsion free δ-rings is
a morphism of δ-rings if and only if it commutes with the Frobenius lifts.
But in the presence of p-torsion, a Frobenius lift is not a well-behaved structure—
for instance, the category of rings with Frobenius lift does not have equalisers. The
δ-ring structure repairs such flaws and gives an intelligent generalisation of the
structure of a Frobenius lift to all rings. Some evidence for this is the fact that the
forgetful functor (R, δ) 7→ R from δ-rings to rings admits both a right adjoint
R 7→ (W (R), δW (R) )

(3)

and a left adjoint
R 7→ (J(R), δJ(R) ).
(4)
In fact, more is true. This forgetful functor is comonadic, meaning that the category
of δ-rings agrees with the category of coalgebras for W , viewed as a comonad on
the category of rings. It is also monadic: δ-rings are algebras for the monad J.
1.2. Witt vectors. The ring W (R) is in fact the usual ring of p-typical Witt
vectors with entries in R, and the corresponding Frobenius lift ϕ is the Witt vector
Frobenius, more commonly denoted F . For formal reasons, W (R) has the following
description, which is not the traditional one. As sets, we have W (R) = R × R ×
R × · · · and δ(x0 , x1 , . . . ) = (x1 , x2 , . . . ). The ring structure is given by laws
(x0 , x1 , . . . ) + (y0 , y1 , . . . ) = (S0 , S1 , . . . )
(x0 , x1 , . . . ) · (y0 , y1 , . . . ) = (P0 , P1 , . . . )

6

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

where Sn is the polynomial Sn (x0 , y0 , . . . , xn , yn ) with integer coefficients giving
the Leibniz rule for the operation δ ◦n with respect to addition, in the sense that

δ ◦n (x + y) = Sn x, y, δ(x), δ(y), . . . , δ ◦n (x), δ ◦n (y) ,

and Pn is similarly the polynomial giving the Leibniz rule for δ ◦n with respect
to multiplication. The existence of such polynomials can be seen by applying the
basic Leibniz rules (1)–(3) above repeatedly, and the uniqueness can be seen by
reducing to the case of p-torsion-free rings, where a δ-structure is equivalent to a
Frobenius lift. The additive and multiplicative neutral elements are (0, 0, 0, . . . )
and (1, 0, 0, . . . ).
There is a canonical isomorphism between W (R) as defined above and Witt’s
original construction [29], as recalled for example in Serre’s book [27]. This follows
from the fact that the original construction satisfies the universal property of ours.
For a proof of this, one can see p. 215 of Lazard’s book [23], keeping in mind that
it is enough to restrict to rings R which are p-torsion free since both functors are
represented by rings which are p-torsion free—in fact by polynomial rings.
Beware however that the canonical isomorphism between our construction and
Witt’s is not the identity! It is the identity on the components x0 and x1 but
not on x2 and the higher components. One could say that there are two different
coordinate systems on the same functor—the ones above, which we call the Buium–
Joyal components, and the traditional ones, which we call the Witt components. The
Buium–Joyal components are directly connected to a simple universal property, as
above, and hence are usually better for conceptual purposes. For example, the
comonad structure map (or coplethysm or Artin–Hasse map)
∆ : W (R) → W (W (R))
does not have a simple explicit description in terms of the Witt components, but
in terms of the Buium–Joyal components it does:
∆ : (x0 , x1 , . . . ) 7→ ((x0 , x1 , . . . ), (x1 , x2 , . . . ), (x2 , x3 , . . . ), . . . ).
On the other hand, the Witt components are closer to the Verschiebung operator
and are sometimes more convenient for computations.
1.3. Truncations. It also follows from the construction of W (R) above that for
any integer n ≥ 0, the quotient
Wn (R) = Rn+1
of W (R) consisting of truncated vectors (x0 , . . . , xn ) is a quotient ring. Indeed, the
Leibniz rules for δ ◦n depend only on the operators δ ◦i for i ≤ n. Then W (R) is
naturally identified with the limit of the projective system of rings
τ

τ

τ

· · · −→ Wn (R) −→ · · · −→ W1 (R) −→ W0 (R)
given by the truncation maps τ : (x0 , . . . , xn ) 7→ (x0 , . . . , xn−1 ).
For n ≥ 0 the Verschiebung ideal V n+1 W (R) is defined to be the kernel of the
truncation map:
0 → V n+1 W (R) → W (R) → Wn (R) → 0.
It can also be expressed as the image of the n-th iterate of the usual Verschiebung
operator V : W (R) → W (R), but since it is not effortless to define V in terms of
the Buium–Joyal components and since we will not need it, we can ignore this.

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

7

The operator δ : W (R) → W (R) descends to the truncations but only at the
expense of a shift in degree: we have a set map δ : Wn (R) → Wn−1 (R) given by
δ(x0 , . . . , xn ) = (x1 , . . . , xn ).
Similarly, the Frobenius map ϕ : W (R) → W (R) descends to a ring homomorphism
Wn (R) → Wn−1 (R) given by ϕ(x) = τ (x)p + pδ(x).
The comonad structure map also descends to the truncations in a degree-shifting
sense. It becomes a family of maps
∆ : Wm+n (R) → Wn (Wm (R))

(5)

which send a truncated Witt vector (x0 , . . . , xm+n ) to


(x0 , x1 , . . . , xm ), (x1 , x2 , . . . , xm+1 ), . . . , (xn , xn+1 , . . . , xm+n ) .

(6)

1.4. Ghost and coghost maps. Given a δ-ring (R, δ), we have an associated pair
(R, ϕ) of a ring with an endomorphism, where ϕ is the Frobenius lift defined in (2).
This defines a functor from the category of δ-rings to the category of rings with an
endomorphism.
The forgetful functor from the category of rings with endomorphism to rings also
has a right adjoint R 7→ (Π(R), ϕΠ(R) ), where Π(R) is R × R × · · · with, now, the
product ring structure and where ϕΠ(R) is defined by shifting:
ϕΠ(R) : hz0 , z1 , . . . i 7→ hz1 , z2 , . . . i.
The induced map of rings with endomorphism
w : W (R) → Π(R)
is the so-called ghost map. In coordinates, it sends a Witt vector (x0 , x1 , . . . )
in Buium–Joyal components to hZ0 , Z1 , . . . i, where Zn is the integral polynomial
Zn (x0 , . . . , xn ) which expresses ϕ◦n in terms of the iterates of δ:
ϕ◦n = Zn (id, δ, δ ◦2 , . . . , δ ◦n ).
Once again, such polynomials exist because we can apply the Leibniz rules (1)–(3)
repeatedly, and one can show they are unique by considering the case of p-torsionfree rings. (The polynomials Zn have no simple closed-form description. This is
one drawback of the Buium–Joyal components, compared to the Witt components,
where the analogous polynomials are the usual Witt polynomials.) Finally, the
ghost map descends to a homomorphism on the truncations:
wn : Wn (R) → Rn+1 ,
where the target has the product ring structure.
1.5. Witt vectors and jet spaces of sheaves. The functor Wn on rings defines
a functor on the category Aff of affine schemes, which we also denote by Wn :
W

n
Aff
Aff −→

Spec(B) 7→ Spec(Wn (B)).
To pass to non-affine schemes, we need to know this functor is well behaved with
respect to localisation. This is provided by the following theorem:
Theorem 1.5.1. If a morphism R → R′ of rings is étale, then so is the induced
map Wn (R) → Wn (R′ ). If in addition R → S is an arbitrary ring map, then the
canonical map Wn (R′ ) ⊗Wn (R) Wn (S) → Wn (R′ ⊗R S) is an isomorphism.

8

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

For a proof, see 9.2 and 9.4 of [7]. We will only need this for rings in which p
is nilpotent, in which case it was proved earlier in the appendix of Langer–Zink
[20]. (For the so-called big Witt vectors, it was proved even earlier in van der
Kallen [28].)
Let us now equip Aff with the étale topology (SGA4 [1], exp. VII) and let Sh
denote the corresponding category of sheaves of sets. Given any sheaf X ∈ Sh,
define the n-th arithmetic jet space (or Greenberg transform) J n (X) : Aff op → Set
by
J n (X) : T 7→ X(Wn (T )).
This is in fact a sheaf:
Theorem 1.5.2. The presheaf J n (X) on Aff is a sheaf in the étale topology. The
resulting functor J n : Sh → Sh has a left adjoint Wn : Sh → Sh. The functor Wn
agrees with the usual Witt vector functor on the category of affine schemes:
∼

Wn (Spec(R)) −→ Spec(Wn (R))
This follows by general sheaf theory from theorem 1.5.1.
Theorem 1.5.3. If X is a scheme (or an algebraic space), then so are J n (X) and
Wn (X).
Proof. See 12.1, 15.1, 15.6 of [8].



We pass to n = ∞, by taking a limit:


J(X)(T ) := lim J n (X)(T ) = lim X(Wn (T ))
n

n

So for a ring C, a C-point of J(X) is a compatible family of Wn (C)-points of X.
In the affine case, X = Spec(R), we have
J(Spec(R))(Spec(C)) = lim Hom(R, Wn (C)) = Hom(R, W (C)) = Hom(J(R), C),
n

where J(R) denotes the free δ-ring on R, as in (4). Thus we have a canonical
identification
J(Spec(R)) = Spec(J(R)),
and so the functor J we just defined on sheaves agrees with the one already defined
on rings.
The truncation maps τ : Wn+1 (R) → Wn (R) on rings induce functorial projections
u : J n+1 (X) → J n (X),
(7)
for X ∈ Sh. They in turn induce functorial maps Wn (X) → Wn+1 (X) for X ∈ Sh,
and hence an inductive system
W0 (X) → W1 (X) → · · · .
We then define
W (X) = colim Wn (X).
n

Observe that it does not matter whether we take this colimit in the category
of sheaves or presheaves, since every object of Aff is quasi-compact and quasiseparated in the étale topology. Also, we emphasise that generally one has
W (Spec(R)) 6= Spec(W (R)),

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

9

unlike the case for Wn with n finite. For example, if R = Z/pZ, this becomes the
familiar fact Spf(Zp ) 6= Spec(Zp ).
Similarly, the maps ϕ : Wn (R) → Wn−1 (R) induce maps ϕ : J n (X) → J n−1 (X)
whose limit
ϕJ(X) : J(X) → J(X)
(8)
under the projections u is a lift of the Frobenius. We also obtain a lift of the
Frobenius on the Witt vectors
ϕW (X) : W (X) → W (X).
The ghost maps wn : Wn (C) → C n+1 induce maps on sheaves
a
wn :
X → Wn (X)
n+1

which we also call the ghost maps. In the colimit, they become a map
a
w:
X → W (X).
N

The map X → W (X) obtained by restricting w along the inclusion X →
corresponding to 0 ∈ N is called the first ghost component.
Finally, we also have coghost maps which are dual to the ghost maps:

`

NX

γn : J n (X) → X n+1 ,
On C-points, γn is defined to be the map
X(wn )

J n (X)(C) = X(Wn (C)) −→ X(C n+1 ) = X n+1 (C).
The coghost maps are compatible with the projections u and hence pass to a map
γ : J(X) → X N
in the limit.
Theorem 1.5.4 (cf. 15.2, 15.3 of [8]). Let Y = colimi Yi be an ind-algebraic space
and let X → Y be a morphism which is representable (by algebraic spaces) and
étale. Then for all m, n ≤ ∞, the following hold:
(i) The induced map Wn (X) → Wn (Y ) is representable and étale.
(ii) The induced map
Wn (X) → Wn+m (X) ×Wn+m (Y ) Wn (Y )
is an isomorphism.
(iii) For all morphisms Y ′ → Y where Y ′ is an algebraic space the natural map
Wn (X ×Y Y ′ ) → Wn (X) ×Wn (Y ) Wn (Y ′ )
is an isomorphism.
Proof. First observe that the case where m, n < ∞ implies the general case. Indeed,
(ii) and (iii) follow from the finite case by taking colimits; then (i) then follows from
(ii) and (iii) and the finite case. So it is enough to assume m, n < ∞.
Second observe that if X, Y, Y ′ are algebraic spaces, this the theorem is 15.2 and
15.3 of [8].
Now write Xi = X ×Y Yi . Then Xi is an algebraic space because X is representable over Y .

10

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

(iii) If Y ′ is quasi-compact and quasi-separated, then Y ′ → Y factors through
Yi → Y for some i. So we have
Wn (X ×Y Y ′ ) = Wn (Xi ×Yi Y ′ ) = Wn (Xi ) ×Wn (Yi ) Wn (Y ′ ),
since the result holds for algebraic spaces. Hence we obtain the commutative diagram
Wn (X ×Y Y ′ )

/ Wn (X) ×W (Y ) Wn (Y ′ )

Wn (Xi ) ×Wn (Yi ) Wn (Y ′ )

/ (Wn (X) ×W (Y ) Wn (Yi )) ×W (Y ) Wn (Y ′ ).

n

n

n

i

Therefore, it is enough to show that
Wn (Xi ) → Wn (X) ×Wn (Y ) Wn (Yi )
is an isomorphism. However, this is nothing but the colimit of the maps
Wn (Xi ) → Wn (Xj ) ×Wn (Yj ) Wn (Yi )
for j ≥ i, which are isomorphisms by 15.2 of [8].
For general Yλ′ , we can reduce to the case where Y ′ is quasi-compact and quasiseparated by taking an affine cover Yλ′ → Y ′ . For we then have
Wn (X ×Y Y ′ ) ×Wn (Y ′ ) Wn (Yλ′ )

=

Wn (X ×Y Yλ′ )

∼

−→ Wn (X) ×Wn (Y ) Wn (Yλ′ )
=

(Wn (X) ×Wn (Y ) Wn (Y ′ )) ×Wn (Y ′ ) Wn (Yλ′ )

and so the map
Wn (X ×Y Y ′ ) −→ Wn (X) ×Wn (Y ) Wn (Y ′ )
is an isomorphism.
(ii) The map in question is the filtered colimit over i of the maps
Wn (Xi ) → Wn+m (Xi ) ×Wn+m (Yi ) Wn (Yi )
which are isomorphisms by 15.4 of [8].
(i) The family (Wn (Yi ) → Wn (Y ))i is a cover in Sh and a morphism being
representable by algebraic spaces and étale is local in the étale topology, so that it
is enough to show the claim after base change along each Wn (Yi ) → Wn (Y ). The
map
Wn (X) ×Wn (Y ) Wn (Yi ) → Wn (Yi )
under the isomorphism
∼

Wn (X) ×Wn (Y ) Wn (Yi ) −→ W (Xi )
of (iii) is just the natural map Wn (Xi ) → Wn (Yi ) which is étale by 15.4 of [8]. 

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

11

1.6. δ-structures on sheaves. The monad structure on the ring functor R 7→
J(R) of (4) prolongs naturally to a comonad structure on the sheaf functor J : Sh →
Sh, as we now explain. The truncated comonad maps of (5) induce maps between
iterated truncated jet spaces:
νm,n : J m+n (X) → J m (J n (X))

(9)

and hence in the limit
ν : J(X) → J(J(X))
This is the comultiplication map J → J ◦ J for the comonad structure. The co-unit
is given by the projection u : J(X) → J 0 (X) = X. We also note that since W is
the left adjoint of J, it inherits a monad structure from the comonad structure on
J.
We define a δ-structure on a sheaf X to be a co-action of the comonad J on X.
This means a map α : X → J(X) such that the following diagrams commute:
X

α

/ J(X)

ν


/ J(J(X))

α


J(X)

α

/ J(X)
X❈
❈❈
❈❈
❈
u
idX ❈❈❈
! 
X

J(α)

(10)

This definition could equivalently be given as an action of the monad W on X and
we shall often use this definition instead.
If X is affine, this definition of δ-structure agrees with the one in section 1.1
above: there is a canonical bijection between the set of δ-structures on Spec(R)
and the set of δ-structures on R. The category of δ-sheaves and δ-morphisms will
be denoted by Shδ .
Finally, if X is a δ-sheaf, writing ϕX : X → X for the composition
α

ϕJ(X)

u

X −→ J(X) −→ J(X) −→ X.
we find that ϕX : X → X is a lift of the Frobenius. (Note that when X = J(Y ), this
map ϕX agrees with the previously defined map ϕJ(Y ) .) Therefore, every δ-sheaf
is equipped with a lift of the Frobenius and all δ-morphisms are compatible with
these lifts.
1.7. Relative δ-structures. Let S be a sheaf with a δ-structure and denote by
ShδS the slice category of Shδ over S. Just as Shδ is comonadic over Sh, the relative analogue ShδS is comonadic over ShS (although no longer by definition). The
comonad is
X 7→ JS (X) := J(X) ×J(S) S
where the map S → J(S) implicit in the product is the δ-structure map α on S.
Since both α and the map J(X) → J(S) are morphisms of δ-sheaves, JS (X) inherits
a canonical δ-structure and is the fibre product in the category of δ-sheaves. As in
the absolute setting, we have truncations
JSn (X) = J n (X) ×J n (S) S
and comultiplication maps
νm,n : JSm+n (X) −→ JSm JSn (X)

(11)

induced by the absolute comultiplication maps, which we abusively also denote by
νm,n .

12

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

It is also true that ShδS is monadic over Sh. The monad is just X 7→ W (X)
again, but here W (X) is viewed as an object of ShδS via the composition
W (X) −→ W (S) −→ S
via the adjunct W (S) → S of the δ-structure map α. So with some abuse of
notation, we will still use W to denote this monad on ShδS .
Given a δS -sheaf X, the Frobenius lift ϕX : X → X does not lie over the identity
map on S but over the Frobenius lift ϕS : S → S. Therefore, we obtain a relative
Frobenius lift
ϕX/S : X → ϕ∗S (X)
(12)
which is a morphism in ShδS .
The absolute coghost maps γn : J n (S) → S n+1 and γn : J n (X) → X n+1 induce
relative coghost maps
γX/S,n : JSn (X) = J n (X) ×J n (S) S → X n+1 ×S n+1 S =

n
Y

ϕ◦i∗
S (X),

i=0

and taking the limit of these maps, a relative coghost map in the infinite-length
setting:
γX/S : JS (X) → X N ×S N S.
(13)
Since the forgetful functor ShδS → ShS is both monadic and comonadic, all limits
and colimits exist in ShδS , and the underlying S-sheaf of a limit or colimit can be
computed in ShS . In particular, a group structure on an object X ∈ ShδS is the same
as a group structure on the underlying S-sheaf such that the structure morphisms
(multiplication, identity, and inverse) are morphisms of δS -sheaves.
2. Further properties of δ-structures and Witt vectors
The purpose of this section is to establish some basic results about δ-structures
and Witt vectors. They are only used in the proofs of the main theorems. None
of them is needed to make sense of the theorems themselves. So this section can
safely be skipped and referred back to as needed.
2.1. Relative δ-structures are δ-local with respect to the base. Let S be a
δ-sheaf and let X be an S-sheaf. Then for each δS -sheaf S ′ we can consider the set
δX/S (S ′ ) := {δS ′ -structures on X ×S S ′ }.
If S ′′ → S ′ is a morphism of δS -sheaves and X ×S S ′ is equipped with a δS ′ -structure
then the fibre product (X ×S S ′ )×S ′ S ′′ = X ×S S ′′ is a δS ′′ -sheaf, or in other words,
we are given a δS ′′ -structure on X ×S S ′′ . This gives a map
δX/S (S ′ ) → δX/S (S ′′ )
which makes the assignment S ′ 7→ δX/S (S ′ ) a presheaf on ShδS .
Lemma 2.1.1. The functor δX/S is a sheaf (for the canonical topology on ShδS ).
Proof. Let S ′′ → S ′ be an epimorphism of δS -sheaves and write S ′′′ = S ′′ ×S ′ S ′′ .
Then
/ X ×S S ′
// X ×S S ′′
X ×S S ′′′
is a coequaliser diagram in the category of S-sheaves.

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

13

If X ×S S ′′′ is given a δS ′′′ -structure and X ×S S ′′ is given a δS ′′ -structure such
that the two maps X ×S S ′′′ ⇒ X ×S S ′′ are δS ′′ -maps then the S ′ -sheaf underlying
the coequaliser of the two maps X ×S S ′′′ ⇒ X ×S S ′′ in the category of δS ′ sheaves is X ×S S ′ , because ShδS ′ is comonadic over ShS ′ . Hence, X ×S S ′ admits a
unique δS ′ -structure making the map X ×S S ′′ → X ×S S ′ a δS ′ -morphism. This is
equivalent to the functor δX/S being a sheaf for the canonical topology on ShδS . 
2.2. δ-structures on p-adic sheaves. Let us say that a sheaf S ∈ Sh is p-adic if
the structure map S → Spec(Z) factors through
Spf(Zp ) = colim Spec(Z/pn ) ⊂ Spec(Z).
n

For example, an affine scheme Spec(R) is p-adic if and only if p is nilpotent in R.
Proposition 2.2.1. If S is a p-adic scheme, then so is Wn (S) and the natural
maps
Wn (S) → Wn+m (S)
are nilpotent immersions.
Proof. Using theorem 1.5.4, we may pass to an affine cover of S and therefore
assume that S = Spec(R), where p is nilpotent on R. So we are reduced to showing
that the kernels of the truncation maps Wn+m (R) → Wn (R) are nilpotent. It is
further enough to take m = 1. Then the kernel V Wn (R) of Wn+1 (R) → Wn (R)
satisfies (V Wn (R))2 ⊂ pWn (R), and so it is enough to show that p is nilpotent in
Wn (R). However, as R is a Z/pi+1 Z-algebra for some i, and Z/pi+1 Z = Wi (Fp ) it
follows that Wn (R) is a Wn (Wi (Fp ))-algebra. Therefore it is enough to show that
p is nilpotent in Wn (Wi (Fp )). But the comonad comultiplication map
Wn+i (Fp ) → Wn (Wi (Fp ))
makes Wn (Wi (Fp )) an algebra over the ring Wn+i (Fp ) = Z/pn+i+1 Z, in which p
is indeed nilpotent.

For any sheaf S let EtS denote the category of relatively representable étale
algebraic spaces over S. If S also has a δ-structure write EtδS for the category of
relatively representable étale δS -sheaves.
Proposition 2.2.2. If S is a p-adic ind-scheme, the functor
EtδW (S) −→ EtS ,

Z 7→ Z ×W (S) S

is an equivalence of categories with quasi-inverse W .
Proof. First, observe that we may assume S is a p-adic scheme because if S =
colimi Si , the categories in question are the 2-limits of the categories EtSi and
EtδW (Si ) respectively.
Now the functor in question factors:
EtδW (S) ֒→ EtW (S) → EtS .
The second functor is an equivalence because of the equivalences
∼

EtWn (S) −→ EtS
for all n ≥ 0, which follow from proposition 2.2.1. Further W : EtS → EtW (S)
is a right quasi-inverse of the functor EtW (S) → EtS , by theorem 1.5.4. But W
has essential image in the subcategory EtδW (S) . Therefore EtδW (S) ֒→ EtS is an
equivalence and W is a two-sided quasi-inverse.


14

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

Proposition 2.2.3. Let S = Spec(A), where A is a ring in which p is nilpotent.
Then the category of finite locally free δW (S) -schemes is equivalent to the category
of finite locally free δW (A) -algebras.
Proof. As W (A) = limn Wn (A) and the transition maps are surjective with nilpotent kernels, by proposition 2.2.1, it follows that the categories of finite locally free
W (S)-schemes and finite locally free W (A)-schemes are equivalent, with the W (A)scheme Spec(B) corresponding to the W (S)-scheme colimn Spec(Wn (A) ⊗W (A) B)
and the W (S)-scheme T corresponding to the W (A)-scheme Spec(limn Bn ), where
Spec(Bn ) = T ×W (S) Wn (S). (We leave the argument to the reader.)
Now, to give a δW (A) -structure on B is equivalent to giving a W (A)-morphism
B → W (B) satisfying certain properties. However, this is also equivalent to giving
a family of morphisms
Bm+n → Wn (Bm )
for n, m ≥ 0 which in turn is equivalent to giving morphisms
Wn (Tm ) → Tn+m
for n, m ≥ 0 whose colimit defines a W (S)-morphism
W (T ) → T.
Tracing through these equivalences, we see that to give a δS -structure on T is
equivalent to giving a δW (A) -structure on B.

e and H
e be two δW (S) -groups over
Lemma 2.2.4. Let S be a p-adic sheaf and let G
e is relatively representable and étale over W (S), then the natural map
W (S). If H
H, e
G) → HomS (H, G)
HomδW (S) ( e

from δW (S) -homomorphisms to S-homomorphisms is bijective.
e ×W (S) S lifts by adjunction to a unique δW (S) Proof. Any map f : H → G = G
e However, H
e = W (H) and the functor W commutes with
map fe: W (H) → G.
e →G
e is
étale fibre products (by proposition 2.2.2), from which it follows that fe: H
a homomorphism if and only if f : H → G is a homomorphism.


2.3. The sufficiency of J 1 for ind-affine sheaves. Putting a δ-ring structure
on a ring is equivalent to putting an action of the comonad W on it. This is true
nearly by definition, namely our definition of W . The purpose of this section is
to prove the analogous result for ind-affine sheaves, where it appears to require
proving something.
We will also work in the relative setting. So fix a δ-sheaf S. Let (Aff S,ind )δ
denote the full subcategory of ShδS consisting of the objects which are ind-affine.
Let C denote the category of pairs (X, β), where X is an ind-affine sheaf over S and
β : X → JS1 (X) is a section of the projection u : JS1 (X) → X and where a morphism
(X, β) → (X ′ , β ′ ) is a morphism f : X → X ′ of ShS compatible with the sections
in the evident sense: β ′ ◦ f = JS1 (f ) ◦ β.
Consider the functor
(Aff S,ind )δ −→ C ,

X 7→ (X, α1 )

(14)

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

15

where α1 is the composition
α

u

α1 : X −→ JS (X) −→ JS1 (X)
and where α is the structure map of the δS -structure on X.
Proposition 2.3.1. The functor (14) is an equivalence of categories.
One might say that W , viewed as a monad on ind-affine sheaves, is freely generated by the pointed functor W1 . Before we prove it, we will need some preliminary
results.
Lemma 2.3.2. For any n ≥ 1 and any ring R, the diagram
∆

Wn+1 (R)

τ

/ Wn W1 (R)

/

/ Wn−1 W1 (R)

∆◦Wn (τ )

is an equaliser diagram.
Proof. This is immediate in Buium–Joyal components. Consider a Witt vector

z = (x0 , y0 ), (x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn ) ∈ Wn W1 (R).

Then we have
and


τ (z) = (x0 , y0 ), (x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn−1 , yn−1 )


∆ ◦ Wn (τ )(z) = ∆(x0 , . . . , xn ) = (x0 , x1 ), (x1 , x2 ), . . . , (xn−1 , xn ) .

These two Witt vectors are equal if and only if
y0 = x1 ,

y1 = x2 ,

...,

yn−1 = xn .

But by the explicit description of ∆ : Wn+1 (R) → Wn W1 (R) given in (6), this is
precisely the condition for z to lie in the image of ∆ and, second, ∆ is a monomorphism.

Remark 2.3.3. The map ∆ : Wn+1 (R) → Wn W1 (R) even has a functorial retraction.
In ghost components, it is given by
ha0 , b0 i, . . . , han , bn i 7→ ha0 , a1 , . . . , an−1 , an , bn i.
Proposition 2.3.4. If X is ind-affine, the diagram
ν1,n

JSn+1 (X)

1
JS
(u)

/ J 1 J n (X)
S S

/
/ JS1 JSn−1 (X)

ν1,n−1 ◦u

is an equaliser diagram.
Proof. For any affine S-scheme Spec(R), the diagram of R-points is
X(Wn+1 (R))

∆

/ X(Wn W1 (R))

τ

/
/ X(Wn−1 W1 (R)) .

∆◦Wn (τ )

It is enough to show that this is an equaliser diagram. If X is affine, this is
an immediate consequence of lemma 2.3.2. If X is ind-affine, the result follows
formally from the affine case and the fact that for filtered colimits we have

(colim Xi )(C) = colim Xi (C)
i

i

for any ring C and the fact that finite limits are preserved by filtered colimits.



16

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

Proof of proposition 2.3.1. First consider the category C ′ consisting of pairs (X, β),
where X ∈ ShS and β is any morphism X → JS1 (X), and where a morphism
(X, β) → (X ′ , β ′ ) is any morphism X → X ′ compatible with β and β ′ . (This is the
category of so-called co-algebras for the functor JS1 .) Then
Q C is a full subcategory of
C ′ , and C ′ is comonadic over ShS with comonad X 7→ n (JS1 )◦n (X). Therefore it
is enough to show that for any object (X, β) of C and for any n ≥ 1, the composition
J 1 (β)

β

S
βn : X −→ JS1 (X) −→
JS1 JS1 (X) −→ · · · −→ (JS1 )◦n (X)

factors through the monomorphism
νn : JSn (X) −→ (JS1 )◦n (X)
obtained by iterating the maps ν1,m−1 : JSm (X) → JS1 JSm−1 (X) starting at m = n
and going down to m = 2. We do this by induction, the case n = 1 being clear. So
assume βn factors through νn , yielding a map αn : X → JSn (X).
′
First, let βn+1
denote the composition
β

J 1 (αn )

X −→ JS1 (X) S−→ JS1 JSn (X),
and let
′
νn+1
: JSn+1 (X) −→ JS1 JSn (X)
denote the comultiplication map ν1,n . When composed with the monomorphism
′
′
JS1 (νn ) : JS1 JSn (X) → (JS1 )◦(n+1) (X), the map βn+1
becomes βn+1 and νn+1
becomes
′
′
νn+1 . Therefore we have νn ◦ αn = βn , since νn ◦ αn = βn .
Now, to prove that βn+1 factors through νn+1 , it is certainly enough to prove
′
′
that βn+1
factors through νn+1
. This will then follow from proposition 2.3.4 by the
universal property of equalisers, once we verify the equation

JS1 (u) ◦ (JS1 (αn ) ◦ β) = νn′ ◦ u ◦ (JS1 (αn ) ◦ β)
But this holds because both sides equal βn′ :
JS1 (u) ◦ JS1 (αn ) ◦ β = JS1 (αn−1 ) ◦ β = βn′
and
νn′ ◦ u ◦ JS1 (αn ) ◦ β = νn′ ◦ αn ◦ u ◦ β = νn′ ◦ αn = βn′ .

2.4. δ-structures on ind-affine sheaves. Let S be a ind-affine sheaf. We say
that S is p-torsion free if it is of the form colimi Spec(Ri ), where the pro-abelian
group (Ri [p])i∈I is isomorphic to the zero pro-abelian group, where Ri [p] denotes
the group of p-torsion elements in Ri . This is equivalent to saying that for any
i ∈ I, there exists a j ≥ i such that the map Rj [p] → Ri [p] is zero.
Proposition 2.4.1. The forgetful functor from the category of p-torsion free indaffine δ-sheaves to the category of p-torsion free ind-affine sheaves equipped with a
lift of the Frobenius is an equivalence.
Proof. Let S = colimi∈I Spec(Ri ), where (Ri )i∈I is a p-torsion free pro-ring. First
we show that the functor is essentially surjective, that any Frobenius lift on S comes
from a unique δ-structure on S.
Let W 1 (Ri ) ⊂ Ri × Ri denote the image of the ghost map W1 (Ri ) → Ri × Ri .
So we have W 1 (Ri ) = {hx0 , x1 i ∈ Ri2 | x1 ≡ xp0 mod pRi }. Therefore sections of
the projection W 1 (Ri ) → Ri are in natural bijection to Frobenius lifts on Ri .

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

17

We now show that this also holds for pro-rings. Suppose we have a Frobenius
lift ϕ on (Ri )i . So given any index i ∈ I, there is an index j ≥ i and a map
ϕi,j : Rj → Ri such that for all x ∈ Rj , we have ϕi,j (x) ≡ x̄p mod pRi , where
x̄ denotes the image of x under the structure map Rj → Ri . Therefore the ring
homomorphism Rj → Ri × Ri defined by x 7→ hx̄, ϕi,j (x)i has image in W 1 (Ri ),
and hence on the pro-rings it defines a map s : (Ri )i → (W 1 (Ri ))i which is a
section of the projection onto the left-hand component. Observe further that its
composition (Ri )i → (W 1 (Ri ))i → (Ri )i with the projection onto the right-hand
component is indeed the given Frobenius lift ϕ and that s is the only section with
this property, since W 1 (Ri ) is a subset of Ri × Ri . In this way, sections of the
projection (W1 (Ri ))i → (Ri )i are in natural bijection to Frobenius lifts on (Ri )i .
Since the analogous result for δ-structures and W1 is true by proposition 2.3.1,
all that remains is to show that the map of pro-rings (W1 (Ri ))i → (W 1 (Ri ))i is
a pro-isomorphism. So for any j ≥ i, consider the commutative diagram of exact
sequences:
0

0

/ Rj [p]

/ Ri [p]

V

V

w1

/ W1 (Rj )
 yt
/ W1 (Ri )

t

t
w1

t

/ W 1 (Rj )
t

/0


/ W 1 (Ri )

/ 0,

where V (x) = (0, x). As (Ri )i is p-torsion free, for any index i there exists an index
j ≥ i such that the map Rj [p] → Ri [p] is zero. It follows that for such j there exists a
unique map W 1 (Rj ) → W1 (Ri ) such that both the triangles in the diagram above
commute. It therefore defines a morphism of pro-rings (W 1 (Ri ))i → (W1 (Ri ))i
which is an inverse of the map (W1 (Ri ))i → (W 1 (Ri ))i on both the left and the
right.

Remark 2.4.2. If S = colimi Spec(Ri ) is a p-torsion free ind-affine sheaf then:
(i) W (S) is a p-torsion free ind-affine sheaf. Indeed, it is enough to show that
the pro-ring (Wn (Ri ))i∈I is p-torsion free for each n, but this is true because
the kernel of the n-th ghost map
wn : Wn (R) → Πn (R)
is the set of Witt vectors with Witt components (x0 , x1 , . . . , xn ) such that
pi xi = 0 for 0 ≤ i ≤ n. (Note that it does not matter whether we use the
Buium–Joyal components or the Witt components here. This is because
the statement admits a coordinate-free formulation. It is equivalent to the
element lying in the kernel of the map Wn (R) → Wj (R/(pj -torsion)) for all
j ≤ n. The proof, however, does seem to be easier in the Witt coordinates.)
(ii) If X → S is relatively representable, flat and affine then X is a p-torsion
free ind-affine sheaf. Indeed, if X = colim Spec(Bi ), where Spec(Bi ) =
X ×S Spec(Ri ), then each Bi is flat over Ri and so Bi [p] = Ri [p] ⊗Ri Bi
and hence for each i there is a j ≥ i such that Ri [p] ⊗Ri Bi → Ri [p] ⊗Ri Bi
is zero.

18

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

Proposition 2.4.3. Let S = colim Si be an ind-affine δ-sheaf, let X → S be a
relatively affine δS -sheaf and let E be a δS -equivalence relation on X in the category
of fpqc-sheaves.1 If the equivalence relation E is one of the following:
(a) smooth,
(b) finite locally free,
then the quotient X/E in the category of fpqc-sheaves over S admits a unique
δS -structure compatible with the quotient map X → X/E.
Proof. (a) If the equivalence relation is smooth then the quotient X/E in the category of fpqc sheaves coincides with the quotient in the category of étale sheaves
which then coincides with the quotient in the category of δS -sheaves.
(b) Now assume that the equivalence relation is finite locally free. Write Ei =
E ×S Si , Xi = X ×S Si , and X/E and Xi /Ei for the quotients in the category
of fpqc sheaves. Then X/E ×S Si = Xi /Ei is an affine scheme over Si (by usual
descent, cf. Corollaire 7.6 Exposé VIII [3]) and hence X/E is a relatively affine
scheme over S. It remains to show that X/E admits a unique δS -structure for
which the map X → X/E is a δS -map.
As the functor Wn preserves equalisers of rings and E ⇒ X is a δS -equivalence
relation, for each i, n, there is a j ≥ i and a diagram of solid arrows
Wn (Ei )

// W (X )

/ Wn (Xi /Ei )


Ej


// X


/ Xj /Ej

n

i

j

whose rows are coequalisers in the category of (absolutely) ind-affine sheaves over
S and which is commutative in the evident sense. Therefore, we obtain a unique
morphism Wn (Xi /Ei ) → Xj /Ej , as shown, compatible with the rest of the diagram.
Moreover, the diagrams above are compatible as i and j vary, so that we may take
the colimit to obtain a morphism ρn : Wn (X/E) → X/E. These morphisms are
compatible as n varies and hence define a morphism ρ : W (X/E) → X/E.
To show that ρ is a δS -structure on X/E, it is enough to check that the ρn satisfy
a certain associativity property (which will be recalled below). To do this, consider
the diagram
Wn (Wm (E))

// W (W (X))
n
m

/ Wn (Wm (X/E))

 
Wn+m (E)

// W

 

 
/ Wn+m (X/E)


E

n+m (X)


// X


/ X/E.

defined as follows. The horizontal morphisms are the obvious ones, the lower vertical maps ρm+n : Wm+n (∗) → ∗ come from the δS -structure or, in the case of
1We note that as S and W (S) are ind-affine sheaves it follows that they are sheaves on Aff for
the fpqc topology and that all relatively affine sheaves (for the étale topology) over them are also
sheaves on Aff the fpqc topology.

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

19

∗ = X/E, were constructed above. The vertical parallel pairs are given, on the left,
by the coplethysm map (5), and on the right by
Wn (Wm (∗))

inclusion

→

Wn+m (Wm (∗))

Wn+m (ρm )

→

Wn+m (∗).

The associativity property we need to show is that the two compositions down the
right column agree for every m and n.
However, the two compositions down each of the other columns agree because X
and E are δS -sheaves. Additionally, the rows are still coequalisers in the category
of absolutely ind-affine sheaves over S, as they are colimits of such. Then because
the diagram commutes (in the evident sense), it follows from a diagram chase that
the map ρm+n : Wn+m (X/E) → X/E is equalised by the pair of maps above it. 
2.5. δ-structures on p-torsion free schemes. The aim of this section is to prove
that a Frobenius lift on a p-torsion free scheme is equivalent to a δ-structure. Note
that this does not automatically reduce to the affine case as the Frobenius lift in
general will not act as the identity on the underlying topological spaces.
Lemma 2.5.1. Let X be a scheme (or algebraic space) equipped with a lift of the
Frobenius ϕ : X → X. Then the two compositions
i

X ×Spec(Z) Spec(Z/pn+1 Z)

/X

wn+1
wn ◦ϕ

// Wn+1 (X)

agree.
Proof. Because the diagram is functorial in X, we may assume that X lies over
Spec(Z/pn+1 Z), in which case we are reduced to showing that the maps
X

wn+1
wn ◦ϕ

// W

n+1 (X)

agree. However, the Frobenius lift ϕ : X → X restricts to a unique Frobenius lift
on any affine étale neighbourhood Spec(A) → X. So we may reduce further to the
case where X = Spec(A) is affine.
We now let (a0 , . . . , an+1 ) ∈ Wn+1 (A) in Witt coordinates and just compute:
ϕ(wn (a0 , . . . , an+1 )) =

n

ϕ(ap0 + · · · + pn an )
n

=

ϕ(a0 )p + · · · + pn ϕ(an )

=

ap0

=

wn+1 (a0 , . . . , an ),

n+1

+ · · · + pn apn

where the last two equalities hold because A is a Z/pn+1 Z-algebra.



Proposition 2.5.2. The forgetful functor from the category of p-torsion free algebraic spaces equipped with a δ-structure to the category of p-torsion free algebraic
spaces equipped with a lift of the Frobenius is an equivalence.
Proof. We will show essential surjectivity first. Let X be a p-torsion free algebraic
space and let ϕ : X → X be a lift of the Frobenius. We will show that there is a
unique δ-structure on X inducing ϕ.
We will first prove that for each n ≥ 0 there is a unique map µn : Wn (X) → X
such that wi ◦ µn = ϕ◦i for 0 ≤ i ≤ n. For n = 0, we take µ0 = idX . Then
by induction, we may construct µn+1 , assuming µn has been constructed. So it

20

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

is enough to prove there exists a unique map µn+1 : Wn+1 (X) → X such that
µn+1 |Wn (X) = µn and µn+1 ◦ wn+1 = ϕ◦(n+1) .
Now consider the diagram
i1 ◦w̄n+1

X × Spec(Z/pn+1 Z)

i2 ◦i

// Wn (X) ∐ X

µn ∐ϕ◦n+1

/ Wn+1 (X)
µn+1

 w
X,
where i1 and i2 denote the summand inclusions, i is as in lemma 2.5.1, and w̄n+1
denotes the reduced (n + 1)-st ghost map of section 17.1 in [8]. The two properties
we require µn+1 to satisfy are equivalent to the commutativity of the right-hand
triangle. Thus it is enough to prove the existence and uniqueness of the map µn+1
as shown making the triangle commute.
The top row is however a coequaliser in the category of algebraic spaces by
theorem 17.3 of [8]. So the existence and uniqueness of our map µn+1 is equivalent
to the vertical map µn ∐ ϕ◦n+1 coequalising the two left horizontal arrows. In other
words, it is equivalent to the equality µn ◦ w̄n+1 = ϕ◦(n+1) ◦ i. But this follows
immediately from the equality µn ◦ wn = ϕ◦n , which holds by induction, and the
equality w̄n+1 = wn ◦ ϕ ◦ i, which is the statement of lemma 2.5.1.
In the limit, the maps µn : Wn (X) → X induce a map µ : W (X) → X. To show
that this is in fact an action of the comonad W , we must show that the two induced
maps W (W (X)) ⇒ X agree. However we know that their compositions with the
ghost maps N × N × X → W (W (X)) agree. This is just the associativity property
of the action of N on X induced by the endomorphism ϕ. Therefore it is enough
to observe that the ghost morphisms wn : ∐n+1 X → Wn (X) are epimorphisms
in the category of algebraic spaces. This holds because wn is surjective and the
induced map on structure sheaves OWn (X) → wn∗ O∐n+1 X is injective, which can
be shown by applying the étale localisation theorem 1.5.1 to reduce to X affine and
then invoking the fact that the ghost map Wn (R) → Rn+1 is injective and integral
when R is a p-torsion free ring. (The epimorphism property can also be proved by
the applying the coequaliser property in diagram above inductively.)
Therefore the functor in question essentially surjective. It is obviously faithful.
It remains to show that it is full. So let X and Y be two p-torsion free algebraic
spaces equipped with lifts of the Frobenius, and let f : X → Y be a morphism
compatible with these lifts. Showing that f is a δ-morphism amounts to showing
that two maps W (X) ⇒ Y agree. However their compositions with the ghost map
w : N × X → W (X) agree because f is ϕ-equivariant. Now we can again invoke the
fact that the ghost maps wn are epimorphisms when X is a p-torsion free algebraic
space to conclude that the original maps W (X) ⇒ Y do agree.

2.6. Affineness of the coghost map. We collect here a handful of affineness
results concerning the coghost maps. The main application of these results is to
prove certain uniqueness results for δ-structures on abelian schemes.
Lemma 2.6.1. Let X be a scheme with the property that every finite set of points
of X is contained in an open affine subscheme of X. Then for each n ≥ 0 the
coghost map
γn : J n (X) → X n+1
is affine.

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

21

Proof. The property satisfied by X implies that there is an open affine cover (Xi )i∈I
of X such that (Xin+1 )i∈I is an open cover of X n+1 . However, the diagram
J n (Xi )

γn

/ X n+1
i

(15)

J n (X)

γn



/ X n+1

is cartesian by proposition 12.2 of [8] (where it is also assumed that the open
immersions Xi → X are closed but the proof that the diagram (15) is cartesian
does not use this assumption) and the top morphisms is affine. As (Xin+1 )i∈I is a
cover of X n+1 it follows that the bottom row of (15) is affine.

Lemma 2.6.2. Let S = colimi∈I Si be an ind-affine sheaf equipped with a δstructure and let f : X → S be sheaf over S. If, setting Xi = X ×S Si , the coghost
maps
γn : J n (Xi ) → Xin+1
are affine for all i then the relative coghost map
γX/S,n : JSn (X) → X n+1 ×S n+1 S
is affine.
Proof. The morphism γX/S,n is affine if and only if the morphisms
γX/S,n ×S Si
are affine for each i ∈ I. Fixing such an i, since Si is quasi-compact and quasiseparated there is some j ∈ I such that the composition Si → S → J n (S) factors
through J n (Sj ) → J n (S). Therefore, we have
JSn (X) ×S Si = J n (X) ×J n (S) Si = J n (Xj ) ×J n (Sj ) Si .
It also follows that Si → S → S n+1 factors through Sj → S n+1 and hence we also
have
X n+1 ×S n+1 Si = Xjn+1 ×S n+1 Si .
j

We can now express γX/S,n ×S Si as the composition along the top row in the
diagram
J n (Xj ) ×J n (Sj ) Si

/ J n (Xj ) ×S n Si


J n (Sj )


/ J n (Sj ) ×S n J n (Sj )

∆

j

/ X n × S n Si
j

j

j

The square in this diagram is cartesian, which shows that the top left arrow is affine.
Since the top right arrow is affine by hypothesis, their composition γX/S,n ×S Si is
affine, and hence so is γX/S,n .

We end this section with an application of the affineness results above which
will have applications to the existence and uniqueness of δ-structures on abelian
schemes.
Proposition 2.6.3. Let S be a δ-sheaf and suppose we have the following:

22

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

(a) X is an anti-affine2 δS -sheaf equipped with a δS -point S → X,
(b) G is a δS -group such that the relative coghost map
γG/S : JS (G) → GN ×S N S
of (13) is affine, and
(c) f : X → G is an S-pointed morphism.
Then f is a δS -morphism if (and only if ) it is compatible with the relative Frobenius
lifts on X and G.
Proof. Let the δS -structures on X and G be given by the S-morphisms
αX/S : X → JS (X)

and

αG/S : G → JS (G).

Since f : X → G commutes with the relative Frobenius maps on X and G, the
difference
g := αG/S ◦ f − JS (f ) ◦ αX/S : X → JS (G)
factors through the kernel of the relative coghost homomorphism γG/S .
As X and G are equipped with δS -points so are JS (X) and JS (G), and the
morphisms composing g are S-pointed, hence so is g. However, the kernel of γG/S
is S-affine by hypothesis and X is S-anti-affine, so that g factors through the
structure morphism X → S:
X → S → JS (G).
As the morphism g is S-pointed, it follows that g = 0. So we have αG/S ◦ f =
JS (f ) ◦ αX/S and thus f is a δS -morphism.

3. Group schemes, torsors and extensions with δ-structures
Let S be an object of Sh, assumed to be ind-affine and p-adic beginning in
section 3.2. The sole purpose of this section is to prove corollary 3.2.8, which relates
extensions of étale group schemes over S to extensions of their lifts to W (S).
3.1. Background on torsors and extensions. Let G and H be a pair of relatively flat and affine commutative group schemes over S. We will write eG : S → G
and µG : G ×S G → G for the identity and multiplication maps (and similarly for
all other groups). Then S, G and H are all sheaves for the fpqc topology, and we
denote by T orS (G) the fibred category of G-torsors over Aff S for the fpqc topology. It is a stack for the fpqc topology. We recall the following constructions for
torsors (for those over S, with the obvious extension to any base).
(i) If f : G → H is a homomorphism, we have a morphism of stacks
T orS (G) → T orS (H) : X 7→ X ⊗G H := (X ×S H)/G
where G acts on X ×S H via the restriction of the action of G ×S H along
G → G ×S H : g 7→ (g, f (g −1 )).
(ii) If G and H are a pair of sheaves of abelian groups over S then the morphism
T orS (G ×S H) → T orS (G) ×S T orS (H) : X 7→ (X/H, X/G)
is an equivalence of stacks.
2An S-sheaf X is anti-affine if every morphism from X to a relatively affine S-sheaf factors
through the structure map X → S.

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

23

(iii) If X is a G-torsor then the dual X ∨ of X is the G-torsor whose underlying
sheaf is X with G acting via the inverse of the given action. It is canonically
isomorphic to the construction X 7→ X ⊗G G in (i) for the homomorphism
G → G : g 7→ g −1 .
(iv) The monoidal structure on T orS (G) is given by
T orS (G) ×S T orS (G) → T orS (G)
(X1 , X2 ) 7→ X1 ⊗G X2 := (X1 ×S X2 )/G
where the quotient by G is via the restriction of the action of G ×S G
along G 7→ G ×S G : g 7→ (g, g −1 ) and the G-action on the quotient is via
either of the (equal) residual actions on X1 and X2 . This monoidal structure is symmetric and for all pairs of G-torsors X1 , X2 we have canonical
isomorphisms
∼

∨
HomG
S (X1 , X2 ) −→ X2 ⊗G X1 .

3.1.1. Let f : G → H be a homomorphism with relatively representable affine and
flat kernel ker(f ) = K. We define T orS [f ] to be the fibred category whose sections
are given by the category of pairs (X, ρ) where X is a G-torsor and ρ : H → X ⊗G H
is a trivialisation, i.e., an isomorphism of H-torsors. There is a natural functor
T orS (K) → T orS [f ] : X 7→ (X ⊗K G, ρ)
where ρ is the trivialisation induced by
X ⊗K H = (X ×S H)/K = (X/K) ×S H = H.
This functor is an equivalence of stacks with quasi-inverse given by sending (X, ρ)
to the equaliser of the two morphisms X ⇒ X ⊗G H given by the compositions
X× e

S H
X ×S H → X ⊗G H
X −→

and

e

ρ

H
H → X ⊗G H.
X→S→

3.1.2. An extension of H by G is a short exact sequence of commutative group
schemes over S
0 → G → E → H → 0.
A morphism of extensions E → E ′ is a homomorphism E → E ′ compatible with the
identity maps on G and H. This yields the moduli stack of extensions E xtS (H, G)
over Aff S .
The group structure on H induces on Aff H the structure of a symmetric monoidal
stack over Aff S , as follows. The product of two affine S-schemes T1 and T2 is
the Cartesian product T1 ×S T2 viewed as an object of Aff H via the composition
T1 ×S T2 → H ×S H → H with the product map. (So if T1 = T2 = S, then this
reduces to the usual group law on H(S).) This defines a monoidal structure on the
category of affine schemes over H, and since it is compatible with base change in
S, it induces a monoidal structure on the stack Aff S .
So we may also consider the Hom stack
H om⊗
S (H, T orS (G))
whose fibre over S is the category of symmetric monoidal morphisms
e : Aff H → T orS (G)
over Aff S .

24

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

There is a natural equivalence of stacks (cf. proposition 1.4.23 of exposé XVIII
in [2])
E xtS (H, G) → H om⊗
S (H, T orS (G))
sending an extension
0→G→E→H →0
to the symmetric monoidal functor η : Aff H → T orS (G) whose value on T →
H is the G-torsor E ×H T (the symmetric monoidal structure on this functor is
induced by the commutative group structure on E). A quasi-inverse is given by
sending a symmetric monoidal functor η : Aff H → T orS (G) to the G-torsor E :=
η(idH : H → H), which inherits the structure of an extension of G by H via the
symmetric monoidal structure on η. Indeed, the addition law on E is obtained via
the composition
∼

∼

E ×S E −→ p∗1 (E) ×(H×S H) p∗2 (E) → p∗1 (E) ⊗G p∗2 (E) −→ µ∗H (E) → E,
where pi are the projections H ×S H → H and µH is the multiplication. The rest
we leave to the reader.
3.2. Torsors and extensions with δ-structures. Let e
G/W (S) be a flat and
affine group scheme over W (S) such that either of the following two conditions
hold:
e is smooth over W (S),
(a) G
e
(b) G is finite locally free over W (S).

e ×W (S) S along the first ghost component. (Later we
Write G for the pull-back G
e which are canonical lifts of a given group G, but
will primarily consider groups G
e
for now G can be an arbitrary lift satisfying the properties above, although this is
some abuse of notation).
e has a δW (S) -structure. A δW (S) -G-torsor
e
e
Now assume that G
is a G-torsor
over
e
W (S) equipped with a δW (S) -structure compatible with the G-action. We denote
G) the fibred category over Aff S whose fibre over an affine S-scheme
by T orδW (S) ( e
e is a
e W (T ) -torsors. The fibred category T orδ
(G)
T is the groupoid of δW (T ) -G
W (S)
stack for the étale topology and the constructions (i)–(iv) of section 3.1 for usual
torsors work just as well for the fibred categories of δW (S) -torsors using proposition
2.4.3 combined with the assumptions (a) and (b) above.
We denote by gGe the symmetric monoidal functor
ge

G
G) −→
T orS (G)
T orδW (S) ( e
X 7→ X ×W (S) S.

Proposition 3.2.1. The functor gGe is fully faithful. If G/S is smooth, then it is
an equivalence.

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

25

e1 and X
e2 are a pair of δW (S) -G-torsors,
e
Proof. If X
then we have
e

e e
HomG
δW (S) (X1 , X2 )

e

e e
e −1
= HomG
e X1 )
δW (S) (G, X2 ⊗G

e2 ⊗ e X
e −1 ))
= HomδW (S) (W (S), X
1
G
= HomS (S, X2 ⊗G X1−1 )

−1
= HomG
S (G, X2 ⊗G X1 )

= HomG
S (X1 , X2 )
whence the full faithfulness.
If G is smooth, then with respect to the étale topology, every G-torsor is locally
trivial so that the fully faithful functor gGe is locally essentially surjective. As both
e and T orS (G) are stacks for the étale topology it follows that g e is
T orδW (S) (G)
G
an equivalence.

3.2.2. Consider an exact sequence of relatively flat and affine δW (S) -group schemes
fe

e →G
e→ e
0→K
H,

and denote its pull-back along the first ghost component by
f

0 → K → G → H.
We define T orδW (S) [fe] to be the fibred category over Aff S whose fibre over an affine
e ρe) where X
e is a G-torsor
e
S-scheme T is the groupoid of pairs (X,
over W (T ) and
e
e
e
e
ρe: H → X ⊗Ge H is an isomorphism of δW (S) -H-torsors together with the obvious
notion of morphism. We denote by gfe the functor
gfe

T orδW (S) [fe] −→ T orS [f ]
(e
X, ρe) 7→ (X, ρ),

where ρ denotes the pull-back of ρe along the first ghost component map S → W (S).

Proposition 3.2.3. If gGe is an equivalence of categories, then so is gfe.

e1 , ρe1 ) and (X
e2 , ρe2 ) be a pair of objects of T orδ
[fe] over some
Proof. Let (X
W (S)
affine S-scheme. Given a morphism θ : (X1 , ρ1 ) → (X2 , ρ2 ), the full faithfulness of
e1 → X
e2 lifting θ. The faithfulness of
gGe implies that there exists a unique θe: X
e
e
e
e2 , ρe2 ), and so g e is fully
gHe shows that θ is in fact a morphism θ : (X1 , ρe1 ) → (X
f
faithful.
Now let (X, ρ) be a section of T orS [f ]. Since gGe is an equivalence, there exists
e lifting X. As g e is fully faithful, it follows that there exists a unique
a unique X
H
e
e ⊗e H
e lifting ρ. Therefore g e is essentially surjective and hence an
ρe: H → X
G
f
equivalence.

Proposition 3.2.4. If gGe is an equivalence of categories, then so is
e → T orS (K).
gKe : T orδW (S) (K)

Proof. As in 3.1.1, we can define a functor

e ρe),
e 7→ (X
e ⊗ e G,
e → T orδ
[fe] : X
T orδW (S) (K)
W (S)
K

26

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

and as before it is an equivalence. We then obtain a 2-commutative diagram
e
T orδW (S) (K)

∼

/ T orδ

W (S)

gfe

gK
f


T orS (K)

∼

[fe]


/ T orS [f ].

The top and bottom arrows are equivalences and the right arrow is an equivalence
by proposition 3.2.3. So the left arrow is also an equivalence.

e be a flat affine δW (S) -group scheme over W (S) satisfying either of
3.2.5. Let G
the conditions (a) and (b) of section 3.2, and let H be an affine étale group scheme
e := W (H) is the unique affine étale
over S. Then proposition 2.2.2 implies H
δW (S) -group scheme lifting H.
e G)
e the fibred category over Aff S whose fibre over an
Denote by E xtδW (S) (H,
e by e
affine S-scheme T is the groupoid of δW (T ) -extensions of G
H, by which we
mean short exact sequences (in the sense of sheaves in the fpqc topology) of δW (T ) group schemes
e W (T ) → E
e→H
e W (T ) → 0,
0→G

e and H.
e Denote by
with morphisms δW (T ) -morphisms inducing the identity on G
e
H om⊗
S (H, T orδW (S) (G))

the fibred category whose fibre over an affine S-scheme T is the groupoid of symmetric monoidal functors (over Aff S )
e
η : Aff HT → T orδW (S) (G).

Such a functor η is determined up to equivalence by its value at the universal point
e = η(HT → HT ),
E

e over W (HT ), together with the δW (H × H ) - e
which is a δW (HT ) - e
G-torsor E
GT
T
T
isomorphism
∼
W (p1 )∗ ( e
E) ⊗ e W (p2 )∗ ( e
E) −→ W (µ)∗ ( e
E),
(16)
G

coming from the monoidal structure on η.
By theorem 1.5.4, we have

e W (T ) ×W (T ) H
e W (T ) .
W (HT ×T HT ) = W (HT ) ×W (T ) W (HT ) = H

Under this identification W (p1 ), W (p2 ) and W (µ) correspond to the usual projece W (T ) ×W (T ) H
e W (T ) → H
e W (T ) respectively, and the
tions and multiplication map H
e
isomorphism (16) corresponds to a δHeW (T ) ×W (T ) HeW (T ) -G-isomorphism
∼
e ⊗ e p∗2 (E)
e −→
e
p∗1 (E)
µ∗ (E).
G

e W (T ) by G
eW (T ) on E
e and so
This induces the structure of a δW (T ) -extension of H
(as for usual torsors) we obtain an equivalence of stacks
e e
e
H om⊗
S (H, T orδW (S) (G)) → E xtδW (S) (H, G).

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

27

Theorem 3.2.6. If gGe is an equivalence, then
is also an equivalence.

e G)
e → E xtS (H, G)
E xtδW (S) (H,

Proof. We have the 2-commutative diagram
e
H om⊗
S (H, T orδW (S) (G))

∼

/ E xtδ

W (S)

≀


H om⊗
(H,
T orS (G))
S

∼

(e
H, e
G)


/ E xtS (H, G)

in which the left arrow (composition with the equivalence gGe ) is an equivalence.
The bottom arrow is an equivalence, as explained in 3.1.2. Similarly, the top arrow
is an equivalence, as just explained in 3.2.5.

Remark 3.2.7. This theorem can be viewed as a derived analogue of lemma 2.2.4.
e be a
Corollary 3.2.8. Let H be an affine étale group scheme over S, and let G
e is
flat and affine δW (S) -group scheme satisfying (a) or (b) of section 3.2. If G
isomorphic to the kernel of a δW (S) -homomorphism of flat and affine δW (S) -group
f1 → G
f2 with G1 smooth over S, then the functor
schemes G
e G)
e → E xtS (H, G)
(H,
E xtδ
W (S)

is an equivalence.

Proof. This follows immediately from proposition 3.2.4, proposition 3.2.1, and theorem 3.2.6.

4. Canonical lifts of ordinary p-groups
4.1. δ-structures on étale and multiplicative p-groups. By a p-group over a
p-adic sheaf S we mean any finite locally free group scheme G locally of p-power
degree. We say that G is étale if G → S is étale, and we say that G is multiplicative
if G is the Cartier dual of an étale p-group.
By an ordinary p-group over S we mean a p-group E for which there exists a
short exact sequence of sheaves of groups
0→G→E→H →0
where G is a multiplicative p-group scheme and H an étale p-group scheme. (See
remark 4.1.1 for an alternative characterisation.)
If E is an ordinary p-group over S, then G and H are uniquely determined (as
sub and quotient groups of E) and are compatible with base change. Indeed, the
inclusion G → E is both an open and closed immersion (being the pull back of the
open and closed immersion S → H along E → H) and is therefore smallest open
and closed sub-sheaf containing the identity section of E. We will write G = Emult
and H = Eét and note that the assignments E 7→ Emult and E 7→ Eét are functorial
in ordinary p-groups E to multiplicative and étale p-groups respectively.
It follows from the above that if E is a p-group over S which is fpqc locally
an ordinary p-group then it is itself an ordinary p-group and the fibred category
Ord over Aff Spf(Zp ) , whose fibre over each p-adic affine scheme S is the groupoid
of ordinary p-groups, is a stack for the fpqc topology.

28

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

We note that every homomorphism G → E, from a multiplicative p-group to an
ordinary p-group, factors through the inclusion Emult → E. In particular, there are
no non-trivial homomorphisms from a multiplicative p-group to an étale p-group.
Remark 4.1.1. A p-group G over S is ordinary in the sense above if and only if:
(i) for all s ∈ S the p-group Gs is ordinary, and
(ii) the degree of (Gs )mult is a locally constant function on S.
As follows from lemma 4.8 of [25]. In particular, if A/S is an abelian scheme such
that As is ordinary for all s ∈ S then A[pn ] is ordinary for all n ≥ 0.
Proposition 4.1.2. Let S be p-adic sheaf.
(i) Every étale (resp. multiplicative) p-group over W (S) admits a unique δW (S) structure compatible with its group structure.
(ii) Every homomorphism of such groups is a δW (S) -homomorphism.
(iii) The category of étale (resp. multiplicative) δW (S) -p-groups is equivalent, via
base change along the first ghost component, to the category of étale (resp.
multiplicative) p-groups over S.
Proof. (i): For étale groups this follows from proposition 2.2.2.
For multiplicative groups, we first note that there is one and only one way to lift
e
a multiplicative group G/S to a multiplicative group G/W
(S) (forgetting about
δW (S) -structures). Indeed, the only possible option is to take the Cartier dual of
the unique lift of the Cartier dual of G (which is an étale group). In particular,
it follows that every multiplicative p-group e
G/W (S) is, after base change along a
morphism W (S ′ ) → W (S) with S ′ → S étale and surjective, of the form
r
Y
(17)
µpni .
i=1

Using the étale local nature of δW (S) -structures on sheaves over W (S), as given by
e is of the form (17) and show that it admits a
lemma 2.1.1, we may assume that G
unique δW (S) -structure compatible with its group structure. It is enough to show
existence and uniqueness locally in the étale topology so that we may also assume
that S = Spec(A) is affine. By proposition 2.2.3 we can instead show that the
W (A)-Hopf algebra
r
O
n1
nr
ni
W (A)[T ]/(T p − 1) = W (A)[T1 , . . . , Tr ]/(T1p − 1, . . . , T1p − 1)
R :=
i=1

admits a unique δW (A) -structure compatible with its W (A)-Hopf algebra structure.
It is clear that R admits at least one such δW (A) -structure given by δR (Ti ) = 0 for
i = 1, . . . , r. So we will show that this is the only one.
Consider a δW (A) -structure δR on R. Set P = Πri=1 {0, . . . , pni − 1} and for
I = (a1 , . . . , ar ) ∈ P write T I = T1a1 · · · Trar so that {T I : I ∈ P } forms a basis for
R as W (A)-module. The operator δR is completely determined by its values
X
δR (Ti ) =
aI,(i) T I
I∈P

on the elements Ti for 1 ≤ i ≤ r. The compatibility of δR with the Hopf algebra
structure on R is by definition equivalent to the equality of set maps
∆R ◦ δR = δR⊗W (A) R ◦ ∆R ,

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

29

which is in turn equivalent to the equalities for 1 ≤ i ≤ r:
∆R (δR (Ti )) = δR⊗W (A) R (∆R (Ti )).
These equalities expand to
X
∆R (
aI,(i) T I ) = δR⊗W (A) R (Ti ⊗ Ti )
I∈P

and then, applying the product rule to δR⊗W (A) R ((Ti ⊗ 1)(1 ⊗ Ti )), to
X
X
X

aI,(i) T I ⊗ T I =
aI,(i) Tip ⊗ T I + T I ⊗ Tip +
paI,(i) aJ,(i) T I ⊗ T J .
I∈P

I∈P

I,J∈P

I

I

Equating the coefficients of T ⊗ T we find that aI,(i) = pa2I,(i) unless I =
(0, . . . , p, . . . , 0) with p in the ith position, where we find that aI,(i) = 2aI,(i) +pa2I,(i) .
Regardless, we find that aI,(i) (1 ± paI,(i)) = 0 which, as p is topologically nilpotent,
in W (R) shows that aI,(i) = 0. Hence δR (Ti ) = 0 for 1 ≤ i ≤ r and the only
δW (A) -structure on R compatible with its Hopf algebra structure is the one with
δ(Ti ) = 0.
(ii): By additivity we are reduced to showing that all W (S)-group scheme homomorphisms
µpm → µpn
are δW (S) -morphisms or, again using proposition 2.2.3, that every Hopf algebra
homomorphism
n

m

θ : W (A)[T ]/(T p − 1) → W (A)[T ]/(T p − 1)
is a δW (A) -homomorphism. As δ(T ) = 0 (on both sides) it is enough to show that
δ(θ(T )) = 0.
As θ is a Hopf algebra homomorphism, we must have
n

θ(T ) =

p
X

ai T i

i=1

where the ai ∈ W (A) are orthogonal idempotents (i.e. ai aj = δij ai and a2i = ai ). As
n
W (A)[T ]/(T p −1) is p-adically complete and the ai are orthogonal and idempotent,
it follows from lemma 4.1.3 below that
!
pn
pn
pn
X
X
X
i
i
ai δ(T i ) = 0
δ(ai T ) =
ai T
=
δ(θ(T )) = δ
i=1

i=1

i=1

i

(as δ(T ) = 0, it follows immediately that δ(T ) = 0). Therefore, θ is a δW (A) homomorphism.
(iii): Since the functor is essentially surjective, by (i), it is enough to prove
it is full and faithful. The category étale p-groups over W (S) is equivalent, by
proposition 2.2.2, to that over S. The same is true for multiplicative p-groups
by Cartier duality. Therefore for any étale (resp. multiplicative) p-groups G and
H over W (S), every homomorphism G ×W (S) S → H ×W (S) S lifts to a unique
homomorphism G → H. By (ii), it is necessarily a δW (S) -morphism.

Lemma 4.1.3. Let R be a p-adically complete δ-ring.
(i) If r ∈ R is idempotent, then δ(r) = 0 and δR (rr′ ) = rδ(r′ ) for all r′ ∈ R.
(ii) If r1 , r2 ∈ R satisfy r1 r2 = 0, then δ(r1 + r2 ) = δ(r1 ) + δ(r2 ).

30

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

Proof. (i) As δ(rr′ ) = rp δ(r′ ) + r′p δ(r) + pδ(r)δ(r′ ) and rp = r it is enough to
show that δ(r) = 0. For this, note that δ(r) = δ(r2 ) = 2rp δ(r) + pδ(r)2 and hence
δ(r)(2r − 1 + pδ(r)) = 0. But 2r − 1 is a unit as (2r − 1)2 = 1 and hence so is
2r − 1 + pδ(r) as R is p-adically complete. Therefore δ(r) = 0.
(ii) This follows immediately from the addition law for δ.

4.1.4. Given (for now) a multiplicative or étale p-group G over S, we refer to the
unique δW (S) -p-group over W (S) lifting G as its canonical lift. We will typically
e This does conflict with our earlier convention of allowing G
e to denote
denote it G.
any lift of G to W (S), but we believe this will not cause any confusion.
4.2. δ-structures on ordinary p-groups. By an ordinary δW (S) -p-group we mean
e over W (S) equipped with a δW (S) -structure compatible
an ordinary p-group E
with its group structure. In this case, the multiplicative and étale group schemes
e := E
emult and H
e := E
eét are both uniquely δW (S) -groups, by proposition 4.1.2.
G
Further, the morphisms in the short exact sequence
e→E
e→H
e →0
0→G

e →E
e is an open immersion (of p-adic sheaves),
are δW (S) -morphisms. Indeed, G
e
e
e
e is
and E → H, being the quotient of E by the finite locally free δW (S) -group G,
a δW (S) -morphism, by proposition 2.4.3. We denote by Ordδ the fibred category
over Aff Spf(Zp ) whose fibre over a p-adic affine scheme S is the groupoid of ordinary
δW (S) -p-group schemes. The étale-local nature of δW (S) -structures shows that this
is a stack for the étale topology.
Lemma 4.2.1. Let G and H be a multiplicative and an étale p-group over Spf(Zp )
respectively. Then base change along the first ghost component induces an equivalence:
H, e
G) → E xtSpf(Zp ) (H, G).
(18)
E xtδW (Spf(Zp )) ( e

Proof. Since the source and target of the functor are stacks, it is enoughQto show
equivalence locally on the base Spf(Zp ). Therefore we may assume G = ni=1 µpri
and hence
n
Y
e=
µpri /W (Spf(Zp )) .
G
i=1

e is the kernel of a homomorphism between relatively affine and smooth
Then G
group schemes
r1

rn

(p ,...,p
e → Gn
−→
0→G
m/W (Spf(Zp ))

)

Gnm/W (Spf(Zp )) .

Further if Gm/W (Spf(Zp )) is given its usual δW (S) -structure, these maps are δW (S) equivariant, by proposition 4.1.2. Corollary 3.2.8 then implies the functor (18) is
an equivalence.

Proposition 4.2.2. The functor
Ordδ → Ord : e
E/W (S) 7→ E/S

induced by pull-back along the first ghost component is an equivalence of groupoids.

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

31

Proof. First, as G and H vary over all multiplicative and étale p-groups over
Spf(Zp ) the maps

E xtSpf(Zp ) (H, G) → Ord (G,H)

form a cover of Ord. Indeed, an ordinary p-group over a p-adic affine scheme S is
locally an extension of a split étale group H by a split multiplicative group G, and
all such groups defined over Spf(Zp ). The claim will then follow if we can show
that for each pair (G, H), the map E → E xtSpf(Z) (H, G) is an equivalence where
E is the fibre product
E

/ E xtSpf(Z ) (H, G)


Ordδ


/ Ord.

p

The sections of E over a p-adic affine scheme S are triples
∼
e ×W (S) S −→
(e
E, E ′ , ρ : E
E′)

e is an ordinary δW (S) -p-group and E ′ /S is an extension of GS by HS . To
where E
show that
E → E xtSpf(Zp ) (H, G)
is an equivalence we will instead show that the natural map
e G)
e →E :E
e 7→ (E,
e E
e ×W (S) S, id e
(H,
)
E xtδ
E×W (S) S

W (Spf (Zp ))

is an equivalence, from which the claim follows, as the composition
e G)
e → E → E xtSpf(Z ) (H, G)
(H,
E xtδ
p

W (Spf(Zp ))

is isomorphic to the equivalence (18).
∼
e E′, ρ : E
e ×W (S) S −→
e adIf (E,
E ′ ) is a section of E over S, then we claim that E
e
e
mits a unique structure of an extension of GW (S) by HW (S) lifting the corresponding
e ×W (S) S induced by ρ. But this is obvious, as the isomorphisms
structure on E
∼
′
eét ×W (S) S −→
E
Eét
= HS

and

∼
′
emult ×W (S) S −→
E
Emult
= GS

induced by ρ lift uniquely to isomorphisms
∼ e
∼ e
emult −→
eét −→
GW (S)
HW (S) and E
E

e the structure of a δW (S) -extension of H
e W (S) by
by proposition 4.1.2, which gives E
e
GW (S) and so the map in question is essentially surjective.
Moreover, if
e1 , E1′ , ρ1 ) → (E
e2 , E2′ , ρ2 )
(fe, f ′ ) : (E
is any isomorphism of sections of E over S then it is easy to check that the induced
map of δW (S) -p-groups
e1 → E
e2
fe: E
e W (S) by G
e W (S) and so
is a morphism of the corresponding δW (S) -extensions of H
the functor in question is also full and therefore an equivalence.

Theorem 4.2.3. For each p-adic affine scheme S, the category of ordinary δW (S) p-groups is equivalent, via base change along the first ghost component, to the category of ordinary p-groups over S.

32

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

Proof. By proposition 4.2.2, this functor induces an equivalence of the groupoids.
In particular, it is essentially surjective, and so we need only show that it is fully
faithful.
First, the categories under consideration are exact, with admissible epimorphisms
those which are epimorphisms of fpqc sheaves, and the functor, pull-back along the
e and E
e ′ of ordinary δW (S) first ghost component, is exact. Hence, fixing a pair E
p-groups we obtain a morphism of exact sequences where the rightmost column
denotes the groups of Yoneda extensions:
e′ , e
/ / Homδ
e′ , e
(E
E)
HomδW (S) (E
W (S)
ét E)

′
HomS (Eét
, E) /


/ HomS (E ′ , E)

/ Homδ

W (S)

e′ , e
(E
mult E)


/ HomS (E ′

mult , E)

/ Extδ

W (S)

e′ , e
(E
ét E)


/ ExtS (E ′ , E).
ét

By proposition 2.2.4, the first vertical arrow is bijective; by proposition 4.1.2, the
e′
e
third arrow is bijective (noting that any δW (S) -homomorphism E
mult → E fac′
e
e
tors uniquely as a δW (S) -homomorphism Emult → Emult , and any homomorphism
′
Emult
→ E factors uniquely as a homomorphism Emult → Emult ); and by corollary 3.2.8, the fourth vertical arrow is bijective. Hence by the Five Lemma, the
second vertical arrow is bijective and we are done.

Remark 4.2.4. It follows from this theorem that the corresponding categories of
ind-objects are equivalent—the the category of ordinary ind-p-groups is equivalent
to that of ordinary ind-δW (S) -p-groups. In particular, the category of ordinary
δW (S) -p-divisible groups is equivalent to the category of ordinary p-divisible groups
over S.
Therefore we have a canonical-lift functor for ordinary p-divisible groups over
any base S. This will allow us to define canonical lifts of ordinary abelian schemes
using the theorem of Serre–Tate.
5. Canonical lifts of ordinary abelian schemes
We refer the reader to chapter 1 of Faltings–Chai [15] for a concise review of
the theory of abelian schemes in the language we will use. We emphasise that by
Raynaud’s theorem ([15], p. 5), an abelian-scheme structure is étale-local on the
base. So we may safely speak of abelian schemes over any sheaf.
5.1. δ-structures on abelian schemes. Before we consider canonical lifts of ordinary abelian schemes we will need several lemmas on δ-structures and abelian
schemes over ind-schemes S (which need not be p-adic).
Lemma 5.1.1. Let S be an ind-scheme, let f : A → B be a homomorphism of
abelian schemes over S and let S0 → S be a nilpotent immersion. If f ×S S0 = 0
then f = 0. In other words, HomS (A, B) is formally unramified.
Proof. We may assume that S is an affine scheme. If f ×S S0 = 0 then it follows
that the homomorphism f : A → B factors through the formal completion of the
identity section of B:
b → B.
A→B
b
However, B is the colimit of the infinitesimal neighbourhoods of the zero section
in B, each of which is affine over S, so that as A is quasi-compact over S the

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

33

homomorphism A → B factors through one of these infinitesimal neighbourhoods.
But these neighbourhoods are all S-affine, and as A is an S-abelian scheme, it is
anti-affine. Therefore this a map factors further through the structure map A → S.
In other words, it is the zero homomorphism.

Proposition 5.1.2. Let S be an ind-affine δ-sheaf, and let A and B be a pair
of abelian schemes over S with δS -structures (not necessarily compatible with the
group structures). Let f : A → B be an S-homomorphism. If f commutes with the
relative Frobenius lifts on A and B, then it is a δS -morphism.
Proof. Write S = colimi∈I Si as a filtered colimit of affine schemes. By theorem 1.9
of chapter I of [15], for each i ∈ I the Si -scheme B ×S Si satisfies the hypotheses
of lemma 2.6.1 so that we may apply lemma 2.6.2 and deduce that the relative
coghost homomorphism
γB/S,n : JSn (B) → B n+1 ×S n+1 S
is affine. Taking the limit over n, we see for general reasons that
γB/S : JS (B) → B N ×S N S
is also affine.
At the same time, A is a relative abelian scheme over S and hence is S-anti-affine.
The claim then follows from proposition 2.6.3.

Corollary 5.1.3. Let S be an ind-affine δ-sheaf, and let A/S be a relative abelian
scheme over S. Then the following hold:
(i) Two δS -structures on A are equal if and only if their relative Frobenius lifts
ϕA/S (defined in (12)) agree.
(ii) A δS -structure on A is compatible with the group law if and only if the
relative Frobenius lift ϕA/S is a group homomorphism.
Proof. (i) Apply proposition 5.1.2 to the morphism id : A → A, where the source
has one δS -structure and the target has the other.
(ii) Apply proposition 5.1.2 to the group law A ×S A → A.

5.2. Canonical lifts. We now fix an ind-affine p-adic sheaf S. As pointed out in
remark 4.2.4, we have a theory of canonical lifts for ordinary p-divisible groups over
S. This allows us to define canonical lifts of ordinary abelian schemes using the
theorem of Serre–Tate, which we recall below.
Let S0 → S be a nilpotent thickening of p-adic sheaves and denote by DS0 /S
the category whose objects are triples (G, A0 , h) where G/S is a p-divisible group,
∼
A0 /S0 is an abelian variety and h : G ×S S0 −→ A0 [p∞ ] is an isomorphism. A mor′
′
′
phism (G, A0 , h) → (G , A0 , h ) is a homomorphism G → G′ and a homomorphism
A0 → A′0 compatible with h and h′ in the evident sense.
Theorem 5.2.1 (Serre–Tate). The functor from the category of abelian schemes
over S to DS0 /S given by
A/S 7→ (A[p∞ ], A ×S S0 , id)
is an equivalence of categories.
Proof. When S is affine, see 1.2.1 of [19] or the appendix of [13] or the original
reference, theorem (2.3) on p. 166 of [25]. The general case then follows for formal
reasons.


34

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

Now, if A/S is an ordinary abelian scheme there exists a unique ordinary abelian
scheme e
A/W (S) with the property that e
A[p∞ ]/W (S) is the unique ordinary δW (S) e
p-divisible group lifting A[p∞ ]/S. We call A/W
(S) the canonical lift of A/S.
It also follows from theorem 5.2.1 that the abelian scheme e
A/W (S) admits a
unique lift of the Frobenius
which is a homomorphism.

∗
e
e
ϕe
A/W (S) : A → ϕW (S) (A)

e
Theorem 5.2.2. There is a unique δW (S) -structure on A/W
(S) compatible with its
group structure. Moreover, e
A/W (S) is the unique deformation of A/S admitting a
δW (S) -structure compatible with its group structure.

e
Proof. As A/W
(S) admits a lift of the relative Frobenius which is a group homoe inducing this relative Frobenius
morphism, uniqueness of a δW (S) -structure on A
lift follows from corollary 5.1.3, which also shows that such a δW (S) -structure must
be compatible with the group law.
Moreover, any deformation of A/S along S → W (S) which admits a δW (S) structure compatible with the group law induces a δW (S) -structure on the corresponding p-divisible group, which must therefore be isomorphic to the p-divisible
e
group of A/W
(S) in a unique way, and so such a deformation must also be isomore in a unique way.
phic to A
e
It remains to show that there exists a δW (S) -structure on A/W
(S) inducing the
given relative Frobenius lift. For this we may first assume that S = Spec(R) is
affine. We can then write R = colimi Ri as a filtered colimit of finitely presented
Zp -algebras. By passage to the limit, any abelian scheme A/ Spec(R) comes from an
abelian scheme Ai / Spec(Ri ) so that we may assume that R is a finitely presented
Zp -algebra. Then R is of the form Zp [T1 , . . . , Tr ]/I where I is a finitely generated
ideal containing some power of p. Since the deformation theory abelian schemes
is unobstructed (see 8.5.24.(a) of [17]), we can find a compatible family of abelian
schemes An / Spec(Zp [T1 , . . . , Tr ]/I n ) for n ≥ 1 with A1 = A, or in other words, an
abelian scheme A′ over the p-adic formal scheme colimn Spec(Zp [T1 , . . . , Tr ]/I n ).
Note that A′ is ordinary as A is and that colimn Spec(Zp [T1 , . . . , Tr ]/I n ) is a ptorsion free ind-affine sheaf. Therefore, in order to show that the relative Frobenius
lift on the canonical lift of an ordinary abelian scheme comes from a δW (S) -structure,
it is enough to do so for ordinary abelian schemes defined over p-torsion free indaffine schemes S of the form colimn Spec(Zp [T1 , . . . , Tr ]/I n ) where I contains some
power of p.
As the transition maps in the system S = colimn Spec(Zp [T1 , . . . , Tr ]/I n ) are
ei →
nilpotent immersions, it follows that we can find a representable open cover (A
e
e
A)i where each Ai is a relatively affine and smooth W (S)-scheme. In particular they
are p-torsion free ind-affine sheaves, as explained in remark 2.4.2. The Frobenius lift
e
e
ϕe
A/S restricts to each Ai (because A is p-adic and the Frobenius map is topologically
ei with a unique δW (S) -structure by proposition 2.4.1.
the identity) and equips each A
Because of this uniqueness, the δW (S) -structures glue to give a δW (A) -structure on
e itself which by construction induces the given Frobenius lift.
A


CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

35

Theorem 5.2.3. Let S be a p-adic scheme. Then the category of ordinary δW (S) abelian schemes is equivalent, via base change along the first ghost component, to
the category of ordinary abelian schemes over S.
Proof. By theorem 5.2.2 every ordinary abelian scheme over S can be lifted to an
ordinary abelian scheme over W (S) equipped with a compatible δW (S) -structure.
Therefore, the functor in question is essentially surjective. Moreover, it is faithful
by lemma 5.1.1, as S → W (S) is a nilpotent immersion.
For fullness, let f : A → B be a homomorphism of ordinary abelian schemes over
S. The restriction of f to the associated p-divisible groups lifts to a unique δW (S) morphism between the associated canonical lifts (of the p-divisible groups). By the
Serre–Tate theorem (5.2.1), it follows that f itself lifts to a unique morphism
e → B.
e
fe: A

As the restriction of fe to the p-divisible groups is a δW (S) -homomorphism it follows
that
e
e → ϕ∗
fe ◦ ϕAe − ϕAe′ ◦ ϕ∗W (S) (fe) : A
W (S) (B)

is trivial on the p-divisible groups and is therefore trivial itself. Hence fe commutes
e and B
e is a δW (S) -homomorphism, by lemma 5.1.2. 
with the Frobenius lifts on A

5.3. Iterated canonical lifts. Since W (S) is also p-adic, we may iterate the
canonical lift construction. However it follows from theorem 5.2.2 that there is
a unique isomorphism
ee ∼
e
A
−→ W (W (S)) ×W (S) A

of δW (W (S)) -abelian schemes lifting the identity map on A, where the implicit morphism W (W (S)) → W (S) in the product is the colimit of the maps Wn (Wm (S)) →
Wm+n (S) induced by (5).
One should view this as expressing the fact that the canonical lift functors equip
moduli stack of ordinary abelian schemes over p-adic with a δ-structure, in the
following sense.
If M denotes the moduli stack in question, then we may formally take the jet
space J(M ) := M ◦ W : an S-point of J(X) is an ordinary abelian scheme over
e
W (S). The canonical lift functor A/S 7→ A/W
(S) is then a morphism
α : M → J(M )

such that the composition with the projection u : J(M ) → M is canonically
isomorphic to the identity of M . The compatibility of iterated canonical lifts
described above, then says that the left square below also commutes up to canonical
isomorphism:
M

α

/ J(M )

ν


/ J(J(M ))

α


J(M )

J(α)

α

/ J(M )
X❉
❉❉
❉❉
❉❉
❉❉ u
idM
" 
M

The reader may now compare with diagram (10) of 1.6 defining δ-structures on
sheaves. Thus, the structure on M above is clearly a stack theoretic incarnation of
that. However, the authors warn that δ-structures on stacks certainly require more
than the simple commutativity (up to canonical isomorphism) of the diagrams

36

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

above, and exactly which approach is best in this case will be left to others to
consider.
Thus, with the provisos mentioned above, we may view the canonical lift functor
e as a δ-structure on the Spf(Zp )-stack of ordinary abelian varieties, even
A 7→ A
though it is not algebraic when g > 1.
6. Duality and algebraisation
6.1. Duality and polarisations. Let S be a p-adic sheaf and let A/S be an
ordinary abelian scheme. It is easily checked that kernel of the relative Frobenius
∗
e
e
ϕA/W
e
(S) : A → ϕW (S) (A)

e mult ⊂ A[p]
e so that we can factor the multiplication-by-p map as
is A[p]
e
A

ϕA/W
e
(S)

−→

v

e
A/W
(S)
e
ϕ∗W (A) ( e
A) −→ A.

It is immediate from the definition that the homomorphism
∗
e
e
ve
A/W (S) : ϕW (S) (A) → A

lifts the relative Verschiebung homomorphism. The dual of the relative Verschiebung
is the relative Frobenius, and hence the dual of v e
A/W (S)
e∨
e∨ → ϕ∗
v ∨e
:A
W (S) (A )
A/W (S)

e∨ .
defines a lift of the the relative Frobenius on the dual abelian scheme A

e is compatible with duality.
Proposition 6.1.1. The canonical lift functor A 7→ A
∨ ∼ f
∨
e
That is, there is a unique isomorphism A −→ A lifting the identity map on A∨ .

Proof. By the uniqueness of theorem 5.2.2, it is enough to show that for an abelian
e∨ of the canonical lift admits a δW (S) -structure compatible
scheme A/S, the dual A
with its group structure. As the canonical lift and the dual are compatible with
base change we may, as in the proof of theorem 5.2.2, assume that S is a p-torsion
e∨ admits a lift of the relative
free ind-affine sheaf. We now need only show that A
Frobenius which is compatible with its group structure, but by the remarks above
we may take ϕAe∨ /W (S) := v ∨e
.

A/W (S)
Corollary 6.1.2. Let λ : A → A∨ be a polarisation. Then its canonical lift
e −→ A
f∨ = (A)
e∨
λ̃ : A

is a polarisation, locally of the same degree.

Proof. This holds because being a polarisation is a property of the fibres λs over
geometric points s of S, and W (S) is a ind-nilpotent thickening of S.

Remark 6.1.3. As in section 5.3, we may therefore view the canonical lift functor
e as a δ-structure on the algebraic Spf(Zp )-stack of ordinary abelian varieties
A 7→ A
of dimension g and with a polarisation of degree d2 . Because the stack is algebraic,
this could no doubt be constructed more directly, as we did in [9].

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

37

6.2. Algebraisation. Often the canonical lift of an abelian variety over a perfect
field k is understood to be an abelian scheme over the affine scheme Spec(W (k))
instead of the formal scheme Spf(W (k)). The following algebraisation theorem
extends this to canonical lifts of families parametrised by a p-adic formal affine
schemes S = colimm Spec(Rm ) whose transition maps are nilpotent immersions.
Let us fix this notation for the remainder of this section, along with R = limm Rm .
Theorem 6.2.1. Let A be a polarised ordinary abelian scheme over S. Then the
e which is a polarised abelian scheme over the ind-scheme W (S), is
canonical lift A,
ealg over the affine scheme Spec(W (R)).
algebraisable to a polarised abelian scheme A
ealg admits a unique lift of the
It is unique up to unique isomorphism. Moreover, A
e
Frobenius extending that on A.

If we regard the canonical lift Ã as a map from W (S) to the moduli stack of
polarized abelian varieties, the theorem says that this map prolongs to Spec(W (R)),
uniquely up to unique isomorphism. We will prove it by invoking algebraisation
results available in the literature, namely those in Bhatt’s paper [5].
Proof. Let d2 denote the degree of the given polarisation of A. For any N ≥ 1,
let AN denote the moduli stack of abelian varieties of dimension dimS (A) with full
level-N structure and a polarisation of degree d2 . It follows from geometric invariant
theory (theorem 7.9 of [26], p. 139) that AN is quasi-projective for sufficiently large
N . Now fix such an N which is further not a multiple of p. Then AN is not
only quasi-projective but also finite étale and G-Galois over the stack A1 = A /G,
where G denotes the group controlling change of level structure. The existence of
ealg now follows from lemma 6.2.2 below.
the algebraisation A
ealg . First, if f : A → B is a
We now show that the Frobenius lift extends to A
finite locally free homomorphism of ordinary abelian schemes over S and Aalg and
B alg denote their algebraisations then there is a unique f alg : Aalg → B alg whose
pull back to S is f . Indeed, we may assume that the degree of f is constant and
equal to N , as the degree of is locally constant of S (i.e. for each N ≥ 1, the subsheaf SN ⊂ S where deg(f ) = N is both open and closed). Therefore, if A[f ] ⊂ A
denotes the kernel of f then A[f ] ⊂ A[N 2 ] and so A[f ] algebraises uniquely to some
A[f ]alg ⊂ Aalg [N ] by the equivalence of categories of finite locally free schemes over
S and Spec(W (R)). It follows that Aalg /Aalg [f ] is an algebraisation of B = A/A[f ]
∼
and hence there is a unique isomorphism Aalg /Aalg [f ] −→ B alg and f alg is the
composition:
∼
Aalg → Aalg /Aalg [f ] −→ B alg .
Therefore, returning to the case at hand, we find a unique map
ealg → ϕ∗ (A
ealg ),
ϕAealg : A

e We now show that ϕ ealg is in
whose pull-back to S is the Frobenius lift ϕAe of A.
A
fact a Frobenius lift.
Let us write W (S)alg = Spec(W (R)), W (S)alg
= W (S)alg ×Spec(Zp ) Spec(Fp ),
p
alg
alg
alg
e ×W (S)alg W (S) and ϕ ealg = ϕ ealg ×W (S)alg W (S)alg .
e =A
A
p
p
p
A
Ap

alg
The closed immersion W (S)alg
induces a bijection on closed points,
p → W (S)
alg
and each closed point of W (S) factors through W (S) → W (S)alg . It follows that
ealg
)→A
− FrAealg
at each closed point. Therefore, ker(ϕAealg
agrees with FrAealg
ϕAealg
p
p
p
p
p

38

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

ealg → Spec(W (R)/p) is smooth, it follows that
is a nilpotent immersion. As A
p
h = ϕAealg
− FrAealg
is equal to the zero morphism after base change along the
p
p
alg
reduction (W (S)alg
p )red → W (S)p . Finally, as h is finitely presented it follows
that there is a nilpotent closed immersion Z → W (S)alg
Z=0
p such that h ×W (S)alg
p
and it now follows by rigidity that h = ϕA − FrA = 0 and therefore ϕAealg is a lift
of the Frobenius.

Lemma 6.2.2. Let Γ ⇒ X be a finite étale groupoid in schemes with X quasicompact and quasi-separated over Spec(Zp ). If Y denotes the quotient stack X/Γ,
then the canonical functor
∼

Y (W (R)) −→ lim Y (Wn (Rm ))
m,n

is an equivalence.
Proof. For any sheaf S the groupoid Y (S) is equivalent to the category of [Γ ⇒ X]torsors over S, where we recall that the category of [Γ ⇒ X]-torsors is given by the
category of finite étale surjective maps S ′ → S equipped with a cartesian map of
groupoids
/Γ
S ′ ×S S ′
 
 
/X
S′
with the obvious notion of morphism.
This description of Y (S) combined with the facts that 1) the categories of finite
étale sheaves over Spec(W (R)) and over W (S) are equivalent and 2) the maps
∼

X(W (R)) −→ lim X(Wn (Rm ))
m,n

∼

and Γ(W (R)) −→ lim Γ(Wn (Rm ))

are bijective (remark 4.3 of [5]) gives the claim.

m,n



Corollary 6.2.3. If S is p-torsion free, then there is a unique δSpec(W (R)) -structure
ealg / Spec(W (R)) extending that on A/W
e
on the algebraisation A
(S).

ealg . It then follows from
Proof. Since S is p-torsion free, so are Spec(W (R)) and A
alg
e
2.5.2 that A
has a unique δSpec(W (R)) -structure inducing compatible with its
Frobenius lift.


Theorem 6.2.4. If S = Spec(R), where p is nilpotent in R, then there is a unique
ealg / Spec(W (R)) extending that on
δSpec(W (R)) -structure on the algebraisation on A
e
A/W (S).
Proof. Since the moduli space of ordinary polarised abelian schemes is smooth and
locally finitely presented, it follows that there exists a p-torsion free formal affine
scheme S ′ = colimn Spec(Bn ), an ordinary polarised abelian scheme A′ /S ′ and a
morphism S → S ′ such that A ∼
= A′ ×S ′ S. (See the proof of 5.2.2.) As the
ealg / Spec(W (R))
algebraisation is functorial it follows that the algebraisation of A
also admits a unique δSpec(W (R)) -structure.


Remark 6.2.5. The theorem stated in the introduction follows from that above.
Indeed, A/R is an ordinary abelian scheme and if A′ /W (R) is any abelian scheme

CANONICAL LIFTS AND δ-STRUCTURES

39

lifting A/R and equipped with a δW (R) -structure compatible with its group struce
ture then A′ ×Spec(W (R)) W (S) must be isomorphic to A/W
(S) by 5.2.3 and so it
′
alg
e by 6.2.1. Moreover, these isomorphisms
follows that A must be isomorphic to A
are compatible with the Frobenius lifts and hence with the δ-structures by 5.1.2.
References
[1] Théorie des topos et cohomologie étale des schémas. Tome 2. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1972.
Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique du Bois-Marie 1963–1964 (SGA 4), Dirigé par M. Artin,
A. Grothendieck et J. L. Verdier. Avec la collaboration de N. Bourbaki, P. Deligne et B.
Saint-Donat, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 270.
[2] Théorie des topos et cohomologie étale des schémas. Tome 3. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1973.
Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique du Bois-Marie 1963–1964 (SGA 4), Dirigé par M. Artin,
A. Grothendieck et J. L. Verdier. Avec la collaboration de P. Deligne et B. Saint-Donat,
Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 305.
[3] Revêtements étales et groupe fondamental (SGA 1). Documents Mathématiques (Paris), 3.
Société Mathématique de France, Paris, 2003. Séminaire de géométrie algébrique du Bois
Marie 1960–61. Directed by A. Grothendieck, With two papers by M. Raynaud, Updated
and annotated reprint of the 1971 original [Lecture Notes in Math., 224, Springer, Berlin].
[4] F. Andreatta and C. Gasbarri. The canonical subgroup for families of abelian varieties. Compositio Mathematica, 143(3):566602, 2007.
[5] Bhargav Bhatt. Algebraization and Tannaka duality. Camb. J. Math., 4(4):403–461, 2016.
[6] James Borger. Λ-rings and the field with one element. arXiv:0906.3146v1.
[7] James Borger. The basic geometry of Witt vectors, I: The affine case. Algebra Number Theory,
5(2):231–285, 2011.
[8] James Borger. The basic geometry of Witt vectors. II: Spaces. Math. Ann., 351(4):877–933,
2011.
[9] James Borger and Lance Gurney. Canonical lifts of families of elliptic curves. Nagoya Math.
J., 233:193–213, 2019.
[10] A. K. Bousfield. On λ-rings and the K-theory of infinite loop spaces. K-Theory, 10(1):1–30,
1996.
[11] Alexandru Buium. Differential characters of abelian varieties over p-adic fields. Invent. Math.,
122(2):309–340, 1995.
[12] Aise Johan De Jong and William Messing. Crystalline Dieudonné theory over excellent
schemes. Bulletin de la Société Mathématique de France, 127(2):333–348, 1999.
[13] V. G. Drinfeld. Coverings of p-adic symmetric domains. Funkcional. Anal. i Priložen.,
10(2):29–40, 1976.
[14] Altan Erdoğan. A universal formula for the j-invariant of the canonical lifting. Journal of
Number Theory, 150:26–40, 2015.
[15] Gerd Faltings and Ching-Li Chai. Degeneration of abelian varieties, volume 22 of Ergebnisse
der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1990. With an appendix
by David Mumford.
[16] Luı́s R. A. Finotti. Lifting the j-invariant: questions of Mazur and Tate. J. Number Theory,
130(3):620–638, 2010.
[17] Luc Illusie. Grothendieck’s existence theorem in formal geometry. In Fundamental algebraic
geometry, volume 123 of Math. Surveys Monogr., pages 179–233. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2005. With a letter (in French) of Jean-Pierre Serre.
[18] André Joyal. δ-anneaux et vecteurs de Witt. C. R. Math. Rep. Acad. Sci. Canada, 7(3):177–
182, 1985.
[19] N. Katz. Serre-Tate local moduli. In Algebraic surfaces (Orsay, 1976–78), volume 868 of
Lecture Notes in Math., pages 138–202. Springer, Berlin-New York, 1981.
[20] Andreas Langer and Thomas Zink. De Rham-Witt cohomology for a proper and smooth
morphism. J. Inst. Math. Jussieu, 3(2):231–314, 2004.
[21] Eike Lau. Displays and formal p-divisible groups. Inventiones mathematicae, 171(3):617–628,
2008.
[22] Eike Lau. Divided Dieudonné crystals. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.09439, 2018.

40

JAMES BORGER AND LANCE GURNEY

[23] Michel Lazard. Commutative formal groups. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 443.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1975.
[24] Vikram B Mehta and Vasudevan Srinivas. Varieties in positive characteristic with trivial
tangent bundle. Compositio Mathematica, 64(2):191–212, 1987.
[25] William Messing. The crystals associated to Barsotti-Tate groups: with applications to abelian
schemes. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 264. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1972.
[26] D. Mumford, J. Fogarty, and F. Kirwan. Geometric invariant theory, volume 34 of Ergebnisse
der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (2) [Results in Mathematics and Related Areas (2)].
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, third edition, 1994.
[27] Jean-Pierre Serre. Local fields, volume 67 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag,
New York, 1979. Translated from the French by Marvin Jay Greenberg.
[28] Wilberd van der Kallen. Descent for the K-theory of polynomial rings. Math. Z., 191(3):405–
415, 1986.
[29] Ernst Witt. Zyklische Körper und Algebren der Charakteristik p vom Grad pn . Struktur
diskret bewerteter perfekter Körper mit vollkommenem Restklassen-körper der charakteristik
p. J. Reine Angew. Math., (176), 1937.
[30] Thomas Zink. Windows for displays of p-divisible groups. In Moduli of abelian varieties,
pages 491–518. Springer, 2001.
[31] Thomas Zink. The display of a formal p-divisible group. Astérisque, 278:127–248, 2002.
Mathematical Sciences Institute, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
E-mail address: james.borger@anu.edu.au

