           Λ-RINGS AND THE FIELD WITH ONE ELEMENT


                                       JAMES BORGER


         Abstract. The theory of Λ-rings, in the sense of Grothendieck’s Riemann–
         Roch theory, is an enrichment of the theory of commutative rings. In the
         same way, we can enrich usual algebraic geometry over the ring Z of integers
         to produce Λ-algebraic geometry. We show that Λ-algebraic geometry is in a
         precise sense an algebraic geometry over a deeper base than Z and that it has
         many properties predicted for algebraic geometry over the mythical field with
         one element. Moreover, it does this is a way that is both formally robust and
         closely related to active areas in arithmetic algebraic geometry.




                                        Introduction
    Many writers have mused about algebraic geometry over deeper bases than the
ring Z of integers. Although there are several, possibly unrelated reasons for this,
here I will mention just two. The first is that the combinatorial nature of enumer-
ation formulas in linear algebra over finite fields Fq as q tends to 1 suggests that,
just as one can work over all finite fields simultaneously by using algebraic geome-
try over Z, perhaps one could bring in the combinatorics of finite sets by working
over an even deeper base, one which somehow allows q = 1. It is common, follow-
ing Tits [60], to call this mythical base F1 , the field with one element. (See also
Steinberg [58], p. 279.) The second purpose is to prove the Riemann hypothesis.
With the analogy between integers and polynomials in mind, we might hope that
Spec Z would be a kind of curve over Spec F1 , that Spec Z ⊗F1 Z would not only
make sense but be a surface bearing some kind of intersection theory, and that we
could then mimic over Z Weil’s proof [64] of the Riemann hypothesis over function
fields.1 Of course, since Z is the initial object in the category of rings, any theory
of algebraic geometry over a deeper base would have to leave the usual world of
rings and schemes.
    The most obvious way of doing this is to consider weaker algebraic structures
than rings (commutative, as always), such as commutative monoids, and to try us-
ing them as the affine building blocks for a more rigid theory of algebraic geometry.
This has been pursued in a number of papers, which I will cite below. Another nat-
ural approach is motived by the following question, first articulated by Soulé [57]:

    Date: June 17, 2009. 21:02.
    This is a preliminary version, made available in advance of the Frobenius Lifts workshop at
the Lorentz Center, Leiden, 2009 October 5–9. I hope to include the toric uniformization theorem
in the final version.
    This work was partly supported by Discovery Project DP0773301, a grant from the Australian
Research Council.
    1The origins of this idea are unknown to me. Manin [48] mentions it explicitly. According to
Smirnov [56], the idea occurred to him in 1985 and he mentioned it explicitly in a talk in Shafare-
vich’s seminar in 1990. It may well be that a number of people have had the idea independently
since the appearance of Weil’s proof.
                                                1
2                                      J. BORGER


Which rings over Z can be defined over F1 ? Less set-theoretically, on a ring over
Z, what should descent data to F1 be?
   The main goal of this paper is to show that a reasonable answer to this question
is a Λ-ring structure, in the sense of Grothendieck’s Riemann–Roch theory [31].
More precisely, we show that a Λ-ring structure on a ring can be thought of as
descent data to a deeper base in the precise sense that it gives rise to a map from
the big étale topos of Spec Z to a Λ-equivariant version of the big étale topos of
Spec Z, and that this deeper base has many properties expected of the field with
one element. Not only does the resulting algebraic geometry fit into the supple
formalism of topos theory, it is also arithmetically rich—unlike the category of sets,
say, which is the deepest topos of all. For instance, it is closely related to global
class field theory, complex multiplication, and crystalline cohomology.
   So let us define an F1 -algebra to be a Λ-ring. (The language of F1 will quickly
feel silly, but for most of this paper, it will be useful as an expository device.) More
generally, define an F1 -scheme to be a scheme equipped with a Λ-structure. The
theory of Λ-structures on schemes was introduced in Borger [6][7]. (Although see
Grothendieck [34], p. 506.) Defining a Λ-structure on a general scheme X takes
some time, as it does on a general ring. But when X is flat over Z, there is a simple
equivalent definition: it is a commuting family of endomorphisms ψp : X → X,
indexed by the set of prime numbers p, such that each ψp agrees with the p-th
power Frobenius map on the special fiber X ×Spec Z Spec Fp . It is also true that
any reduced Λ-scheme is flat over Z. Keeping these two facts in mind, it is possible
to read most of this paper without knowing the definition in general.
   If we take this F1 -to-Λ dictionary seriously, then the functor that removes the
Λ-structure from a Λ-scheme should be thought of as removing the descent data,
and hence as the base-change functor from F1 to Z. So for instance, F1 itself should
be defined to be Z with its unique Λ-structure, where each ψp is the identity map.
It is the initial object in the category of Λ-rings.
   As indicated above, the definition of a Λ-structure extends not just to the cat-
egory of schemes but to the entire ambient topos. By this, I mean the big étale
topos over Z, by definition the category of sheaves of sets on the category of affine
schemes equipped with the étale topology. It is therefore natural to define the
big étale topos over F1 to be the category of such sheaves with Λ-structure. The
base-change functor v ∗ that strips off the Λ-structure then induces a well-defined
map
                                v : Spec Z −→ Spec F1 ,
not on the level of schemes, which would of course be meaningless, but on the level
of big étale toposes.
    The functor v ∗ has not only a right adjoint v∗ , as required, but also a left adjoint
v! . If we think of v ∗ as the base-change functor, we should think of v∗ as the Weil
restriction of scalars functor and v! as the base-forgetting functor. In terms of
definitions rather than interpretations, v∗ sends a space to its arithmetic jet space,
which is a multi-prime, algebraic version of Buium’s p-jet space [9], which is in
turn a formal p-adic lift of the Greenberg transform [29][30]. On the other hand,
v! sends a space to its space of big Witt vectors. Both of these are given their
natural Λ-structures. These constructions are exotic by the standards of algebraic
geometry over fields, but even in the arithmetically local case, where we consider p-
adic schemes with only one Frobenius lift ψp , they have proven very useful. See, for
                    Λ-RINGS AND THE FIELD WITH ONE ELEMENT                             3


example, Buium [9] for applications of the first and Illusie [37] for the second. (In
fact, Buium has had similar ideas regarding Frobenius lifts and the field with one
element. See [10], the preface of [9], or Buium–Simanca [11]. Manin [47] has also
recently interpreted Witt vectors as being related to the field with one element.)
   For applications to usual, non-Λ arithmetic algebraic geometry, the most inter-
esting spaces over F1 are those obtained from schemes over Z. Whether we produce
them by applying v! or v∗ , the result is almost never a scheme of finite type over
F1 . So from the perspective of algebraic geometry over Z, the spaces of principal
interest over F1 are not those of finite type. In fact, as has been expected, there
appear to be very few schemes of finite type over Z that descend to F1 at all. But
their infrequency is so extreme that they become interesting on their own terms.
For example, it might be possible to describe the category of algebraic spaces of
finite type over F1 in purely combinatorial terms, without any mention of algebraic
geometry or Λ-structures.
   This question is probably within reach, and the second purpose of this paper is
to take some steps in that direction. For example, we prove the following theorem,
stated here under restricted hypotheses:

0.1. Theorem. Let X be a smooth proper scheme over Z[1/M ], for some integer
M ⩾ 1. If X descends to F1 (i.e., admits a Λ-structure), then is has the following
properties:
                                                                           n
   (a) The action of Gal(Q̄/Q) on any p-adic étale cohomology group Hét    (XQ̄ , Qp )
       factors through its abelianization.
   (b) There is an integer N , all of whose prime divisors divide M p, such that the
                                           n
       restriction of the representation Hét (XQ̄ , Qp ) to Gal(Q̄/Q(ζN )) is isomor-
       phic to a sum of powers of the cyclotomic character.
   (c) The (i, j) Hodge number of the mixed Hodge structure on the singular co-
       homology H n (X an , C) is zero when i 6= j.

   Another way to express this theorem is that only abelian Artin–Tate motives
can be defined over F1 . (Compare Soulé [57], 6.4, question 4.) While this means
there are no motivically interesting F1 -schemes of finite type, the argument that
shows this is rather interesting. In the zero-dimensional case, it is an elementary
consequence of the Kronecker–Weber theorem and Chebotarev’s density theorem.
(See Borger–de Smit [4].) In the higher-dimensional case, the argument also uses
the Lefschetz theorem and the proper base change theorem for étale cohomology,
on the one hand, and on the other, p-adic Hodge theory, including the potentially
semi-stable theorem for arbitrary varieties proved by Kisin [41], following the work
of many others.
   The theorem above attests to the predicted combinatorial nature of schemes of
finite type over F1 . I emphasize once again that the combinatorial nature is not built
into the foundations of the theory—it is a consequence of hard arithmetic results
in the presence of finiteness conditions. Indeed, I expect that the cohomological
theory of infinite-dimensional spaces over F1 contains, via v! and de Rham–Witt
theory, the full theory of motives, and even in a visible way. It is hard to imagine
a theory defined in combinatorial terms having this property.
   As strong as the cohomological restrictions above are, they are far from being
sharp. In a future version of this paper, I hope to show that all examples of finite
type come from toric varieties, in a certain precise sense. Here is a partial result in
4                                     J. BORGER


this direction whose proof does appear in the present version. It is probably even
a necessary step in the proof of the full classification theorem.
0.2. Theorem. Let X be a Λ-scheme which is of finite type over Z. Then X has
a point with coordinates in a cyclotomic field. When X is proper, there is even a
Λ-morphism Spec Z → X.
   In other words, every F1 -scheme of finite type has a cyclotomic point and, if
proper, has an F1 -point. I believe that this result had not been predicted. Observe
that in the affine case, the theorem is a new result about Λ-rings, which can be
stated independently of the theory. It says that every Λ-ring which is finitely
generated as a ring admits a ring map to some cyclotomic field. Even in this case,
the proof uses all the deep arithmetic results above.
   If we apply theorem 0.1 and the Lefschetz fixed-point formula at various primes
p, we obtain the following result, which was essentially predicted (implicitly by the
followers of Tits [60], and by definition in Kurokawa [44]):
0.3. Corollary. Let X be a smooth proper scheme over Z[1/M ], for some integer
M ⩾ 1. If X descends to F1 , then there is an integer N ⩾ 1 divisible only by the
primes dividing M such that for all prime powers q > 1 with q ≡ 1 mod N , the
number Pof Fq -valued points of X is P (q), where P is the Hodge polynomial of X:
P (t) = i,n (−1)n ri,n ti , where ri,n is the (i, i) Hodge number of Hcn (X an , C).
   In particular, if X is smooth and proper over Z, the number of such points is
given by the polynomial P (q) for all prime powers q > 1.
    Let us now consider F1 -points. It is not difficult to show, when X is separated
and of finite type over F1 , that X(F1 ) is finite. So it is tempting to hope that the
number of F1 -valued points would be P (1), the Euler characteristic of X. This is
typically false, but if we restrict to complemented points—those whose complement
is an open sub-F1 -scheme of X—then it is true in many situations. For instance,
it is true for toric varieties, when given a certain natural, “toric” Λ-structure. But
it is not always true. It fails for the toric varieties A1 and P1 if they are given the
Chebychev Λ-structure (6.7). On the other hand, if all Λ-varieties can indeed be
built from toric varieties with the toric Λ-structure, it might be possible to salvage
the formula X(F1 ) = P (1) = χ(X) by cleverly reinterpreting the definitions.
    Our final purpose is to consider variations on the definition of Λ-structure, such
as function-field analogues. For example, instead of working over Spec Z, we can
work over a smooth curve S over a finite field k. Then our family of commuting
Frobenius lifts would be indexed by the closed points of S, and the same procedure
as over Z gives the notion of a ΛS -structure, a topos of FS1 -spaces, and a topos
map vS : S −→ Spec FS1 . Having invented an absolute algebraic geometry relative
to S, we can ask how it relates to the usual absolute algebraic geometry relative
to S, that is, algebraic geometry over k. The answer is that the structure map
s : S → Spec k factors naturally as a composition of topos maps:

                           S EE
                                      vS
                                                  / Spec FS
                                                          1
                               EE s           f s
                                                    s
                                 EE            s
                                   EE        s
                                     E"   ys
                                    Spec k.
The map f is not an equivalence, but it is not far from being one. For example,
f ∗ embeds the category of reduced algebraic spaces over k fully faithfully into the
                   Λ-RINGS AND THE FIELD WITH ONE ELEMENT                            5


category of spaces over FS1 , but there can be schemes defined over FS1 (given by
certain rank-one Drinfeld modules) that do not descend to k. As a check to see if
this could lead to a proof of the Riemann hypothesis for Z, one might examine the
translation of Weil’s proof of the Riemann hypothesis for S from algebraic geometry
over k to that over FS1 . But since the current version of our theory says nothing
about the archimedean place of Q, it is hard to imagine this succeeding without
further ideas. Even so, it should be done.
   Let us now list the contents of this paper. In section 1, we recall the foundations
of the theory of spaces over F1 (that is, Λ-spaces). In section 2, we give examples
of F1 -schemes. In section 3, we discuss sub-F1 -spaces and in particular F1 -valued
points. In section 4, we discuss function spaces over F1 and especially GLn . In
section 5, we show that abelian motives are Artin–Tate. This is a result in usual,
non-Λ number theory needed in the following section. In section 6, we discuss the
p-adic étale cohomology of F1 -schemes of finite type and implications for point
counting. And in section 7, we consider variations on our approach to F1 for
function fields and number fields larger than Q.

                                   Other work
    In the early days of this project, I was greatly inspired by Manin’s exposition [48],
Soulé’s paper [57], and Deninger’s program, for example [25]. In a strict mathe-
matical sense, this paper does not owe them much, but their spiritual effect has
been deep.
    There are, of course, many approaches to absolute algebraic geometry which I
did not mention above. Here are some I know about. One is that an F1 -algebra
should be some kind of algebraic structure that is set-theoretically weaker than a
commutative ring, for example a commutative monoid. From this point a view
an F1 -vector space is often taken to be a set, perhaps with some additional weak
structure. One could investigate the K-theory that comes out of this, and even
aspire to see the place at infinity by incorporating archimedean information in
these structures. Another approach has been to pursue notions of ζ-functions over
F1 , perhaps independently of any formal definition of F1 . A final approach is to
find and prove analogues over number fields of basic geometric results over function
fields.
    For these approaches see the following references: Baez [3], Connes–Consani [13],
Connes–Consani–Marcoli [14], Deitmar [19][18][20], Diers [26], Durov [27], Ha-
ran [36] [35], Kapranov [38], Kapranov–Smirnov [39], Kurokawa [42][43][44], Kurokawa–
Ochiai–Wakayama [45], Smirnov [55], Tate–Voloch [59], and Toën–Vaquié [61]. Sev-
eral of these writers have other papers on the subject, but I believe these are rep-
resentative of their approaches.

                               Acknowledgments
   My focused work on Λ-algebraic geometry began on October 22, 2003, when I
read an email from Ivan Fesenko asking if there were relations between my paper [5]
with Ben Wieland and the field with one element. That question instantly gave
direction to some scattered thoughts about Λ-algebraic geometry and the p-adic
absolute point (7.10). My interests at the time were arithmetically local, and as
obvious as the global connection is in retrospect, it had not occurred to me before
that day. So I thank him greatly.
6                                     J. BORGER


    I would also like to thank Mark Kisin for many conversations about this project
over several years. Most of his influence on this project is on forthcoming work, but
even with this paper, if he had not insisted that I begin writing up what I knew
in the case of Λ-varieties of finite type over Z, I never would have uncovered much
of what is here. And since the foundational papers [6][7] owe their existence to the
present paper, perhaps they also owe some of it to him.
    I did some of this work in 2004–2005 at the Institut des Hautes Études Scien-
tifiques and the Max-Planck-Institut für Mathematik. It is a pleasure to thank
them for their generous support and nearly ideal working environments. I did more
work on this topic in January 2006, as a visitor at the University of Chicago. I
thank Alexander Beilinson and Vladimir Drinfeld for making that possible.
    I have given a number of lectures on this material, and this paper has benefited
from questions many people have asked, especially Alexandru Buium, Jordan El-
lenberg, and Kirsten Wickelgren. I would particularly like to thank Wickelgren for
some questions that directly inspired the material in section 4.

                                     Contents
    Introduction                                                                     1
    Other work                                                                       5
    Acknowledgments                                                                  5
    1. Λ-spaces                                                                      6
    2. Examples                                                                      8
    3. Sub-Λ-spaces                                                                 11
    4. Function spaces                                                              13
    5. Aside: abelian motives are potentially cyclotomic                            16
    6. p-adic étale cohomology                                                     19
    7. Variants                                                                     24
    References                                                                      29



                                    1. Λ-spaces
1.1. General Λ-spaces. Let us quickly review [7]. Let W ∗ = W∞            ∗
                                                                            denote the
infinite-length big Witt vector functor from the category of spaces to itself. (The
category of spaces is, by definition, the category of sheaves of sets on the category
of affine schemes under the étale topology.) Then W ∗ carries a monad structure,
and a Λ-structure on a space X is by definition an action of W ∗ on X. Note that
if X is an algebraic space, then the space W ∗ (X) is ind-algebraic but typically not
algebraic. This is just the familiar fact that the ring of infinite-length Witt vectors
is naturally a projective limit of rings.
   Here are some important examples. If A is a ring, then we have W ∗ (Spec A) =
colimn Spec Wn (A), where Wn denotes the functor of (big) Witt vectors of length n.
Therefore a Λ-structure on the space Spec A is the same as a Λ-ring structure on A
in the usual sense. If X is a flat algebraic space over Z, then Λ-structure on X is the
same as a commuting family of endomorphisms ψp : X → X, one for each prime p,
such that ψp agrees with the p-th power Frobenius map on X ×Spec Z Spec Fp . If a
reduced algebraic space admits a Λ-structure, then it must be flat over Z. Finally,
if X is a Λ-algebraic space, then Xred is a closed Λ-algebraic subspace. (Because
                     Λ-RINGS AND THE FIELD WITH ONE ELEMENT                           7


a Λ-structure is given by a monad action, a subspace of a Λ-space can have at
most one compatible Λ-structure.) Non-reduced Λ-algebraic spaces appear only
sporadically in this paper.
    The functor W ∗ has a right adjoint W∗ = W∞∗ , the arithmetic jet space functor,
which is a generalized version of Buium’s p-jet space functor [9]. If A is a ring, then
W∗ (Spec A) = Spec Λ A, where Λ A denotes the Λ-ring freely generated by A.
For example, W∗ (A1Z ) = Spec Λ, where Λ is the free Λ-ring on one generator, the
ring of symmetric functions in infinitely many variables.
    Let S = Spec Z, and let SpS = SpZ denote the category of spaces. Let SpS/Λ
denote the category of Λ-spaces (with Λ-equivariant, or rather W ∗ -equivariant,
morphisms). This can also be described using W∗ . By adjunction, W∗ inherits a
comonad structure from the monad structure on W ∗ . The category of Λ-spaces is
the same as the category of spaces equipped with an action of the comonad W∗ . It
is therefore a topos, like SpS .

1.2. Categorical structure. Let v ∗ : SpS/Λ → SpS denote the functor that simply
strips off the Λ-structure. The point of this paper is that v ∗ can also be thought
of as the functor that strips off the descent data from Z to F1 , and hence that it
can be thought of as the base-change functor from F1 to Z. Therefore, we have the
following equation:
                       SpS                              SpZ
                         O                                O

                                              forget              Weil
                v!       v∗    v∗      =               S×F1 −
                                              base               restrict

                           ~                                 ~
                      SpS/Λ                            SpF1 .

This means that the structure on the right is defined to be that on the left, or that
we think of the precisely defined left-hand side using the geometric language of the
right-hand side. Each functor is the left adjoint of the one to its right. The left
adjoint v! of v ∗ sends X to its Witt space W ∗ (X) with the natural Λ-structure,
and the right adjoint v∗ sends X to its arithmetic jet space W∗ (X), again with
the natural Λ-structure. As always the left adjoint of a base-change functor is
called base-forgetting, and the right adjoint is called Weil restriction of scalars. In
particular, if one accepts the premise of this paper, the space Spec Z×Spec F1 Spec Z
must be defined to be the Witt space W ∗ (Spec Z).
   These three adjoint functors form, by definition, an essential topos map v : SpZ →
SpF1 . This is what one would would hope to have with any algebraic geometry over
a deeper base than Spec Z. Similarly, the base-forgetting functor v! is faithful but
not full. (See [6], 12.2.)
   Yet another way of expressing the point of this paper, in the playful tradition
of the field with one element, is the nonsense formula “Λ = Z[Gal(Z/F1 )]”. The
meaning of this is that if descent from Z to F1 were controlled by a finite group,
one would call it Gal(Z/F1 ). In that case, descent for rings would alternatively
be controlled by the plethory Z[Gal(Z/F1 )] whose underlying ring would be the
polynomial ring freely generated by the set Gal(Z/F1 ). (See Borger–Wieland [5].)
But the plethory that actually controls this is Λ. So while the group Gal(Z/F1 )
does not exist, the polynomial algebra it would generate if it did exist does.
8                                      J. BORGER


   Note that everything above extends to the case where S is the spectrum of the
ring of integers of any number field or any smooth curve over a finite field. Thus for
any such S, there is a topos SpFS1 = SpS/ΛS , the topos of spaces over the S-variant
of the field with one element. These toposes are all related as S varies, and as one
would expect, S = Spec Z, as above, gives the deepest one. We will return to this
in section 7.
1.3. Λ-modules. An important topic we will not discuss in this paper is the Λ-
analogue of a quasi-coherent sheaf. The non-linear nature of Λ-structures makes
module theory slightly subtler than it is in equivariant algebraic geometry un-
der actions of monoids or Lie algebras, or more generally in the context of Toën–
Vaquié [61]. The reason for this, in the language of Borger–Wieland [5], is that the
additive bialgebra of the plethory Λ does not agree with the cotangent algebra of
Λ. Therefore one cannot properly speak about modules without specifying certain
extra information. In the case of Λ, these are essentially the slopes of the Frobenius
operators. I mention this here only because F1 -modules are a frequent concern in
papers on the field with one element and I will not address them.

                                     2. Examples
2.1. The point. The ring Z has a unique Λ-structure—each ψp is the identity.
Under this structure, it is the initial object in the category of Λ-rings. It is therefore
reasonable to denote it F1 and call Spec Z, viewed as a Λ-space, the absolute point.
2.2. Monoid algebras. If M is any commutative monoid, the monoid algebra Z[M ]
has a natural Λ-action induced by ψp : m 7→ mp for any m ∈ M , and so Spec Z[M ]
descends naturally to F1 . I will call this Λ-action the toric Λ-action. For example,
given a choice of coordinates, Ar × Gsm equals Spec Z[Nr × Zs ], which descends
naturally to F1 .
   In fact, we have even more: the monoid scheme structure on Spec Z[M ] also
descends to F1 , as does the group structure if M is a group. Indeed, the coalgebra
structure on Z[M ] given by m 7→ m ⊗ m for all m ∈ M is a map of Λ-rings. The
same is true of the counit and, if M is a group, the antipode m 7→ m−1 . For
example, all split tori can be thought of as group schemes over F1 . The group
scheme µn = Spec Z[x]/(xn − 1) = Spec Z[Z/nZ] also descends to F1 . Following
Kapranov–Smirnov [39], Soulé calls this the base change to Z of F1n , the field with
1n elements [57].
2.3. Limits and colimits. The category of Λ-rings has products and coproducts,
and their underlying rings agree with the same constructions taken in the category
of rings. In fact, this is true for all limits and colimits—in particular pull-backs,
push-outs, direct limits, and inverse limits. This is because the forgetful functor
RingΛ → RingZ has a left and a right adjoint.
   Since it is a topos, SpS/Λ also has all limits and colimits. And since v ∗ has a left
and a right adjoint, the space underlying any limit, or colimit, of Λ-spaces agrees
with the limit, or colimit, or the underlying spaces. Further, since algebraization is a
left adjoint, it commutes with W ∗ . Therefore the algebraization of a Λ-space is an
algebraic Λ-space. In particular, given a system of algebraic spaces with Λ-actions,
the colimit taken in the category of algebraic spaces has a unique compatible Λ-
action. (The analogous fact for limits is true simply because the subcategory of
SpS consisting of algebraic spaces is closed under limits.)
                    Λ-RINGS AND THE FIELD WITH ONE ELEMENT                                 9


  For the same reason, the affinization of an algebraic Λ-space is an affine Λ-space.
2.4. Toric varieties. A toric variety is a colimit of spectra of monoid rings, where
the maps in the system are open immersions induced by maps of the monoids.
Therefore the colimit in SpS is an algebraic space (and even a scheme). By 2.2
and 2.3, they carry natural Λ-actions. Thus toric varieties descend to F1 . (Compare
Soulé [57].) In particular, projective spaces Pn do, once we choose homogeneous
coordinates. Then the Frobenius lifts are given by
                           ψp : [x0 , . . . , xn ] 7→ [xp0 , . . . , xpn ].
2.5. The Chebychev line. Clauwens [12] has used Ritt’s work [51][52] to argue that,
up to isomorphism, the affine line Spec Z[x] has exactly one Λ-structure besides the
toric one of 2.2. It can be described as follows. The ring Z[t±1 ], endowed with the
toric Λ-action, has a Λ-involution t 7→ t−1 . By 2.3, the fixed subring is naturally a
Λ-ring. It is freely generated as a ring by x = t + t−1 , and this gives the other Λ-
action on Z[x]. It also has a simple K-theoretic interpretation as the representation
ring of the algebraic group SL2 , but in this paper we are regarding the connection
between Λ-rings and K-theory as a curiosity. The polynomials ψp (x) are Chebychev
polynomials:
        ψ2 (x) = x2 − 2,    ψ3 (x) = x3 − 3x,             ψ5 (x) = x5 − 5x3 + 5x,   ....
  More generally, any subgroup of GLn (Z) acts on the toric Λ-ring Z[x±1           ±1
                                                                      1 , . . . , xn ],
and the invariant subrings give more examples of Λ-rings. For example, if we take
the permutation representation Sn → GLn (Z) of the n-th symmetric group, the
invariant subring is isomorphic to Z[λ1 , . . . , λn−1 , λ±1
                                                          n ] and thus gives a non-toric
Λ-action on An−1 × Gm .
   It would be interesting to generalize Clauwens’ results. For example, are there
only finitely many isomorphism classes of Λ-structures on A2 ?
2.6. Singular lines. We can divide out, not just by group actions, as in 2.5, but
also by any Λ-equivalence relation, whether we take the quotient in the category of
affine Λ-spaces, algebraic Λ-spaces, or all Λ-spaces. For instance, on Gm with the
toric Λ-action, we can identify 1 and −1 to make a nodal line
                        A = {f (z) ∈ Z[t±1 ] | f (−1) = f (1)},
or we can identify 1 with itself to order two to make a cuspidal line
                           A0 = {f (z) ∈ Z[t±1 ] | f 0 (1) = 0}.
It is easy to check that these subrings of Z[t±1 ] are sub-Λ-rings.
   Observe that we can identify the points 1, q ∈ Gm only when q = ±1—otherwise,
the ψp operators would fail to descend to the quotient. But if we use Λ-algebraic
parameter spaces, there are non-discrete moduli. For instance, in the family
                                             1       pr
                                    Gm × Gm −→ Gm ,
we can identify the diagonal section ∆ and the identity section idGm × 1, to get the
family of nodal lines Gm /(1 ∼ q) parameterized by q ∈ Gm . The result is a perfectly
legitimate Λ-algebraic family of nodal Λ-quotients of Gm . The reason why before
q could only lie in a finite set is that there we insisted that the endomorphisms ψp
act trivially on the parameter space. We will see below that an algebraic Λ-space of
finite type over Z has only finitely many points (with coordinates in C, say) fixed
by the ψp operators (3.2). Therefore in any Λ-algebraic family, only finitely many
10                                   J. BORGER


of the fibers will be stable under the ψp . In particular this will be true for any
universal family, assuming the Λ-moduli space is of finite type. So the finiteness
phenomenon above is rather general.
   We can also contract any Λ-invariant modulus on Gm . If f (x) is a product of
polynomials the form xn − 1, then the two maps
                              Z[x±1 ] ⇒ Z[x±1 ]/(f (x)),
one given by x 7→ x and the other by x 7→ 1, are Λ-ring maps. Therefore their
equalizer is a Λ-ring. Its spectrum is Gm with the zero locus of f (x) contracted to
a point.
   Last, these constructions can be used to make Λ-schemes that cannot be covered
by open affine Λ-schemes. In particular, it is inaccurate to say that Λ-schemes are
formed by gluing Λ-rings together in the Zariski topology, though it is generally the
right idea. The following example is due to Ben Wieland. Consider P1 with the
toric Λ-structure, and let X be the quotient by the Λ-equivalence relation 0 ∼ ∞.
Then there is no open immersion j : U → X which has the following properties: U
is an affine Λ-scheme, j is a Λ-map, and the nodal point 0 = ∞ is in the image.
Indeed, if there were such a neighborhood U , then since it would be affine, the set
U (C) would be the complement in X(C) of a finite nonempty subset T of Gm (C).
But U ∩ Gm would also be a sub-Λ-space of Gm . Since ψn on Gm is the n-th power
map, T would have to be closed under the extraction of n-th roots, which is not
the case for any finite nonempty subset of C∗ .

2.7. Zero-dimensional varieties. As shown in Borger–de Smit [4], it follows from
class field theory that every Λ-ring which is both finite over Z and reduced is
contained in a product of cyclotomic fields. It is in fact isomorphic to a sub-Λ-ring
of a product of toric Λ-rings of the form Z[x]/(xn − 1). This can be viewed as an
integral version of the Kronecker–Weber theorem. Thus even zero-dimensional Λ-
algebraic geometry is somewhat interesting. In fact, the proofs of several theorems
about higher-dimensional Λ-varieties use the zero-dimensional theory in key ways.

2.8. Non-example: flag varieties. It follows from a theorem of Paranjape and
Srinivas [50] that no flag varieties besides projective spaces Pn admit even one
Frobenius lift ψp . Therefore, besides Pn , flag varieties are not defined over F1 .
   In 6.2 below, we show that there are strong motivic conditions on a variety for
it to descend to F1 . But in the case of flag varieties, the obstruction is not in the
motive. Indeed, flag varieties are paved by affine spaces and are therefore indistin-
guishable from them from the point of view of motives. It would be interesting to
know whether flag varieties admit a weakened version of a Λ-structure but which
is still stronger than being paved by Λ-varieties.

2.9. Non-example: curves of genus g ⩾ 1. Let CQ be a connected smooth proper
curve over Q of genus g ⩾ 1. Choose in integer M ⩾ 1 such that CQ has a a
connected smooth proper model C over Z[1/M ]. Then C has no Λ-structure. One
can see this as follows.
   If g ⩾ 2, let p be a prime number such that p - M . Then since g ⩾ 2, the map
ψp cannot be a constant map on the fiber over Q because it is not on the fiber over
Fp . Therefore it must be an automorphism on the fiber over Q. Further, there
must exist an integer n ⩾ 1 such that ψp◦n is the identity on the fiber over Q. But
                    Λ-RINGS AND THE FIELD WITH ONE ELEMENT                           11


as CQ is dense in C, we see that ψp◦n is the identity. This contradicts the fact that
ψp is the Frobenius map on CFp , which is a nonempty curve.
   If g ⩾ 1, then for any prime p - M , there is a finite extension K of Qp and
point e ∈ C(K) = C(OK ), where OK denote the integral closure of Zp in K. Let
us now take the group law on COK to be the one for which e is the identity, and
let E denote the endomorphism ring End(CQ̄p ). By enlarging K, we may assume
E = End(CK ). Note that E is an integral domain of rank 1 or 2 over Z.
   Then there is an element ϕ ∈ E such that ψp (x) = ψp (e) + ϕ(x), for all points
x. Therefore on each fiber of COK over OK , the degree of ψp is ϕϕ̄ ∈ Z. But on
the fiber over the residue field of OK , the map ψp agrees with the base-change of
the p-th power Frobenius map, which has degree p. Therefore, we have ϕϕ̄ = p.
This rules out E = Z. To rule out the other case, observe that the same equation
implies p is not inert in E. But since p was allowed to be any sufficiently large
prime, this is impossible.

                                  3. Sub-Λ-spaces
3.1. Periodic primes. Let X be a Λ-space. Let us say that a prime number p is
periodic if there exists an integer m ⩾ 1 such that the endomorphism ψp◦m of X is
the identity. We also say that m a period of p. (Also see Davydov [16].)
3.2. Proposition. Let X be a separated algebraic Λ-space of finite type over Z with
infinitely many periodic primes. Then X is affine and quasi-finite over Z.
Proof. Let us consider quasi-finiteness first. It suffices to assume X is reduced and,
hence, flat over Z. (See [7].) Therefore it is enough to show that X ×Spec Z Spec Q
is finite over Spec Q.
    Let p be one of the given primes, and let Xp denote the fiber of X over p.
Then ψp is periodic, and therefore the p-th power Frobenius map on Xp is periodic.
By 3.3 below, the fiber Xp is finite over Fp . Because there are infinitely many such
p, X is finite over Z at a dense set of scheme-theoretic points. And because X is
of finite type, its fiber over Q is finite. (See EGA IV (9.2.6.2) [33].)
    Affineness follows from quasi-finiteness. Since X is separated, of finite type, and
quasi-finite over Z, Zariski’s Main Theorem [32], III 4.4.3, implies it is an open
subscheme of a scheme which is finite over Z, and any such scheme is affine.          

3.3. Lemma. Let X be an algebraic space of finite type over Fp , and let FrX denote
the p-th power Frobenius map on X. If Fr◦nX is the identity map, then X is a finite
disjoint union of spaces of the form Spec F , where F is a field of degree at most n
over Fp .
Proof. Let U = Spec B be an affine étale cover of X. Then Fr◦n     U is the identity
map on U . In particular, B is reduced and is hence a subring of a finite product of
fields. Because the p-th power map on B has period n, the image in each field is
a field of degree at most n over Fp . Since U is a finite disjoint union of spectra of
finite fields, and since U covers X, X is also such a space.                        

3.4. Proposition. Let X and Y be separated algebraic Λ-spaces of finite type over
Z. Assume that X is reduced and has infinitely many periodic primes. Then
HomΛ (X, Y ) is finite.
12                                      J. BORGER


Proof. Since X is reduced, we can assume Y is reduced. We can also assume that
Y satisfies the same periodicity conditions as X. Indeed, let p be a periodic prime
                                                                        ◦m
of X, and let mp denote its minimal period. Then the equalizer Yp of ψp p and the
identity map is a closed sub-Λ-space of Y . Therefore, so is the reduced subspace of
Y 0 = ∩p Yp , where p runs over all periodic primes of X. But any map X → Y factors
through Y 0 , which as a closed subspace of Y is of finite type over Z. Therefore it
is enough to assume Y = Y 0 , which is to say that Y satisfies the same periodicity
conditions as X.
    By 3.2, there are generically finite rings A and B such that X = Spec A and
Y = Spec B. Because A and B are reduced Λ-rings, they are torsion free, and thus
               HomΛ (X, Y ) = Hom(B, A) ⊆ Hom(Q ⊗Z B, Q ⊗Z A).
By Galois theory, there are only finitely many ring maps between two finite étale
algebras over a field; so HomΛ (X, Y ) is finite.                               

3.5. Corollary. Let X be a separated algebraic space of finite type over F1 . Then
there are only finitely many Λ-maps µn → X, where µn is defined in (2.2). In
particular, X has only finitely many F1 -valued points.

3.6. Primitive Λ-spaces and complemented sub-Λ-spaces. Let f : Y → X be a map
of Λ-algebraic spaces which is a closed (resp. open) immersion. Then Y (or better,
f ) is said to be complemented if the complementary open (resp. reduced closed)
algebraic subspace T admits a Λ-structure such that the map T → X is a Λ-map.
(Compare SGA 4 IV 9.1.13c [1].) Note that because T → X is a monomorphism,
the Λ-structure on T , when it exists, must be unique.
    We also say that a Λ-space X is primitive if it is nonempty and its only nonempty
complemented closed sub-Λ-space is itself.
    Observe that if X 0 → X is a Λ-morphism and Y is a complemented closed (resp.
open) algebraic subspace of X, then its preimage X 0 ×X Y is a complemented closed
(resp. open) algebraic subspace of X 0 . Also it is clear that finite intersections of
complemented closed (resp. open) Λ-algebraic subspaces are again complemented.
Therefore the same is true for finite unions.
    For example, consider A1 with the toric Λ-structure. The Z-valued Λ-points of
   1
A are in bijection with HomΛ (Z[x], Z), which agrees with
                      {x ∈ Z | xp = x for all primes p} = {0, 1}.
So 0 and 1 are the only F1 -valued points of the toric A1 . The point 0 is com-
plemented, because its complement is the toric Gm . But the point 1 is not com-
plemented, because the preimage of 1 under ψ2 , say, is µ2 , which is not contained
in {1}. More generally, the set of F1 -valued points of Ad is {0, 1}d , but the only
complemented point is the origin.

3.7. Proposition. The Λ-space Gdm is primitive, for any integer d ⩾ 0.

Proof. Let Z be a nonempty complemented closed sub-Λ-space of Gdm . Since Zred
is flat over Z ([7]) and nonempty, the space Z has a C-valued point z. Write
z = (ew1 , . . . , ewd ) for some numbers w1 , . . . , wd ∈ C. For each integer s ⩾ 1, the
point
                                zs = (ew1 /s , . . . , ewd /s )
                       Λ-RINGS AND THE FIELD WITH ONE ELEMENT                                      13


satisfies ψs (zs ) = z ∈ Z. Because Z is complemented, we then have zs ∈ Z. But in
the analytic topology we have
                                       lim zs = (1, . . . , 1).
                                      s→∞

Since Z is closed (in the Zariski and hence analytic topology), it contains (1, . . . , 1),
and because it is complemented, it must contain ψn−1 (1, . . . , 1) = µdn for any integer
n ⩾ 1. On the other hand, ∪n µn is Zariski dense in Gm . Therefore ∪n µdn is Zariski
dense in Gdm , and so we have Z = Gdm .                                                  

3.8. Proposition. Let X be a toric variety. Then a closed sub-Λ-space is comple-
mented if and only if it is a union of closures of torus orbits.
  For background on toric varieties, see Fulton’s notes [28], especially sections 2.1
and 3.2.

Proof. Let Z be a closed sub-Λ-space of X. Suppose Z is a union of closures Zi of
torus orbits. Then each Zi is the toric subvariety corresponding to a fan, and is
therefore complemented. Since there are only finitely many torus orbits, the union
Z of the Zi is complemented.
   Now assume instead that Z is complemented. Then its intersection with any
torus orbit Y is either Y or ∅, by 3.7. Therefore Z is a union of torus orbits. Since
Z is closed, it is also a union of their closures.                                 

3.9. Corollary. The complemented F1 -points of a toric variety X are the fixed
points of the torus action. In particular, the number of complemented F1 -points is
the Euler characteristic.
   For example, the only complemented F1 -valued point of the toric An is the
origin. The toric Pn has exactly n+1 complemented points with values in F1 . They
are [1, 0, . . . , 0], [0, 1, 0, . . . , 0], and [0, . . . , 0, 1]. These facts have been predicted in
earlier speculations on the field with one element [60], p. 285.

                                     4. Function spaces
   In this section, we discuss GLn over F1 . The group scheme GLn does not descend
to F1 . (See Buium [8].) But we can realize GLn as the automorphism group of
something that does descend to F1 . This might be surprising, because formation
of function spaces commutes with base change. Indeed, that is one important way
in which the topos map v : SpZ → SpF1 is not like a true map of spaces.
   For discussion of GLn in other approaches to F1 , see for example Connes–
Consani [13] and Toën–Vaquié [61].
   This section was directly inspired by some questions Kirsten Wickelgren asked
me.

4.1. Let X and Y be objects of SpF1 . Write HomF1 (X, Y ) for the set of maps
from X to Y , and write HomZ (X, Y ) for the set of maps v ∗ X → v ∗ Y between the
underlying objects of SpZ . Let HomF1 (X, Y ) denote the usual SpF1 -object of maps
from X to Y . It is defined by
                        HomF1 (X, Y ) : T 7→ HomT (X × T, Y × T ),
for any space T ∈ SpF1 . We define HomZ (X, Y ) similarly.
14                                         J. BORGER


     Then we have a map
(4.1.1)                    HomF1 (X, Y ) −→ v∗ (HomZ (X, Y )),
which sends an F1 -map a : X × T → Y × T to its underlying Z-map v ∗ (a). This
map is clearly injective.
  Adjunction then gives another map
(4.1.2)                 v ∗ : v ∗ (HomF1 (X, Y )) −→ HomZ (X, Y ).
Note that this map is generally neither a monomorphism nor an epimorphism. This
is one way in which the topos map v : SpZ → SpF1 is different from one induced by
a true map of spaces. For example, if X = W (Spec Q), then (4.1.2) is identified
with the map Y Z → Y N , which is rarely a monomorphism. On the other hand, if
X = Y = A1F1 , then the map is not an epimorphism.
    Recall that an endomorphism An → An is a linear transformation if and only if
it is equivariant under the action of Gm on An given by scalar multiplication:
                                    x 7→x ⊗z
                   Z[x1 , . . . , xn ] i −→i   Z[x1 , . . . , xn ] ⊗Z Z[z, z −1 ].
Now observe that if we give Gm and An their toric Λ-structures, then this action
morphism is Λ-equivariant. Therefore it is reasonable to define
(4.1.3)                       Mn/F1 = HomGm /F1 (An , An ),
where for general F1 -spaces X, Y with Gm -actions, we define HomGm /F1 (X, Y ) to
be the sub-F1 -space of HomF1 (X, Y ) consisting of the Gm -equivariant maps. Let
us also set
(4.1.4)                          GLn/F1 = AutGm /F1 (An ),
to be locus of Mn/F1 consisting of invertible maps. Of course, Mn/F1 is a monoid
object in SpF1 and GLn/F1 is a group object. In 4.3 below, we will describe them
concretely.
   Note that because v ∗ is faithful, we can view v ∗ HomGm /F1 (X, Y ) as a subspace
                                                                       

of HomGm (v ∗ X, v ∗ Y ). Consider this when X = An and Y = A1 , both with the
toric Λ-structures. Then for any ring B, a B-valued point of HomGm (An , A1 ) is
just a B-module homomorphism B n → B, or simply a 1 × n matrix (b1 , . . . , bn )
with entries in B. This furnishes an identification
(4.1.5)              HomGm (An , A1 ) = Spec Z[b1 , . . . , bn ] = An
4.2. Proposition. Under the identification (4.1.5), the subspace of An correspond-
ing to the subspace HomGm /F1 (An , A1 ) of HomGm (An , A1 ) is the union of the axes
                          Z = Spec Z[b1 , . . . , bn ]/(bi bj : i 6= j).
Further the operators on Z induced by ψp take each coordinate bi to bpi .
Proof. We just calculate the B-valued points of v ∗ HomGm /F1 (An , A1 ) for any ring
B. We have
       (v ∗ HomGm /F1 (An , A1 ))(Spec B) = (HomGm /F1 (An , A1 ))(v! (Spec B)).
But since HomGm /F1 (An , A1 ) sits inside HomGm (An , A1 ), which is affine, any
map v! (Spec B) → HomGm /F1 (An , A1 ) factors through the affinization Spec W (B)
of v! (Spec B). Therefore we have
       (v ∗ HomGm /F1 (An , A1 ))(Spec B) = (HomGm /F1 (An , A1 ))(Spec W (B)).
                     Λ-RINGS AND THE FIELD WITH ONE ELEMENT                            15


If we think of points of An as n-dimensional column vectors, then it is natural to
think of the points of HomGm (An , A1 ) as 1 × n matrices. Given such a matrix
                                 (a1 , . . . , an ) ∈ W (B)n ,
the corresponding map in HomGm (An , A1 )(Spec W (B)) is an F1 -map if and only
if the ring map
(4.2.1)                    ϕ : Z[t] −→ Z[x1 , . . . , xn ] ⊗ W (B)
                      P
determined by t 7→ j xj ⊗ aj is a Λ-ring map, where Z[x1 , . . . , xn ] has the toric
Λ-structure.
    Thus to finish the proof, it suffices to show that necessary and sufficient condi-
tions for ϕ to be a Λ-ring map are, first, that each element aj is the Teichmüller
lift of some element bj ∈ B and, second, that bi bj = 0 for all i 6= j.
    Let us first show the necessity. So assume ϕ is a Λ-ring map. Consider, for each
i, the map
                         πi : Z[x1 , . . . , xn ] ⊗ W (B) −→ W (B)
given by xj 7→ δij and by the identity on W (B). Then πi ◦ ϕ is a Λ-ring map under
which the image of t is ai .
    It follows that ai must be a Teichmüller lift. Indeed, giving a Λ-map Z[t] →
W (B) is by adjunction the same as giving a ring map Z[t] → B. This in turn is
the same as an element of bi ∈ B. Tracing through these identifications shows that
ai = [bi ], and thus the necessity of the first condition above.
    To see the necessity of the second condition, use the operator λ2 ∈ Λ:
                                                   X              X
       0 = ϕ(0) = ϕ(λ2 (t)) = λ2 (ϕ(t)) = λ2            xj ⊗ [bj ] =  xi xj ⊗ [bi ][bj ].
                                                   j                 i<j

Thus for i 6= j, we have [bi bj ] = [bi ][bj ] = 0 and hence bi bj = 0.
  Sufficiency is similar. Suppose ϕ is defined by
                                              X
                                   ϕ(t) =         xj ⊗ [bj ]
                                             j

with bi bj = 0 for all i 6= j. To show ϕ is a Λ-ring map, it is enough to show it
commutes with P λn for n ⩾ 2. But we have that λn (xj ⊗ [bj ]) = 0 for all n ⩾ 2.
Therefore λn ( j xj ⊗[bj ]) is the n-th elementary symmetric function in the xj ⊗[bj ].
Because bi bj = 0 for i 6= j, each of the elementary monomials is zero when n ⩾ 2.
Therefore we have
                             X              
             λn (ϕ(t)) = λn        xj ⊗ [bj ] = λn (0) = ϕ(0) = ϕ(λn (t)),
                                 j

for n ⩾ 2. Thus ϕ is a map of Λ-rings.                                                 
4.3. Corollary. We have the following equalities of subspaces of Mn :
(4.3.1)             Mn/F1 = Z n        and         GLn/F1 = Sn n Gnm .
Proof. The first equality follows from the universal property of products and 4.2:
                                                            n
              HomGm /F1 (An , An ) = HomGm /F1 (An , A1 ) = Z n .
For the second equality, recall that a morphism of Λ-spaces is an isomorphism if
and only if it becomes one after applying v ∗ . Therefore we have
                          GLn/F1 = GLn ∩ Mn/F1 = Sn n Gnm .
16                                          J. BORGER


                                                                                                

4.4. Corollary.     (a) Mn/F1 (F1 ) is the set of n × n matrices with the property
       that every entry is either 0 or 1 and every row has at most one 1.
   (b) GLn/F1 (F1 ) = Sn .
4.5. Remarks. Note that none of the F1 -valued points of GLn/F1 are comple-
mented. Also note that the determinant map GLn/F1 → Gm is not a Λ-map,
because it fails to commute with ψ2 . It does commute with the other ψp though.

            5. Aside: abelian motives are potentially cyclotomic
   Let p be a prime number. The purpose of this section is to establish the result
(5.3) in usual, non-Λ algebraic geometry that abelian p-adic Galois representations
of geometric origin are Artin–Tate. The proof is an result in p-adic Hodge theory.
It is well within the scope of established techniques, but to my knowledge, it is
not actually in the literature. For results of a similar flavor, see Wang [63], Kisin–
Lehrer [40], and van dan Bogaart–Edixhoven [62].2
5.1. Proposition. Let X be a separated scheme of finite type over Z[1/p]. Let
f : X → Spec Z[1/p] denote the structure map. Then Rn f! (Qp ) is lisse away from
a finite set of primes. If X is smooth and proper over Z[1/M ], then the sheaf is
lisse at all primes not dividing M .
   Recall that we can define cohomology with compact support because, by Na-
gata’s theorem, any separated morphism of finite type between noetherian schemes
is compactifiable. (See Conrad [15], theorem 4.1. Actually, according to a forth-
coming paper of Conrad–Lieblich–Olsson, the scheme-theoretic hypotheses can be
removed.)

Proof. The sheaf Rn f! (Z/pZ) is constructible (Deligne SGA 4 1/2 [21] [Arcata] IV
(6.2)) and hence lisse away from a finite set T of primes. For m ⩾ 0, if Rn f! (Z/pm Z)
is lisse, then all subsheaves and quotient sheaves of Rn f! (Z/pm Z) are lisse away from
T . On the other hand, by the long exact sequence of cohomology, Rn f! (Z/pm+1 Z)
is an extension of a subsheaf of Rn f! (Z/pZ) by a quotient sheaf of Rn f! (Z/pm Z)
and is therefore also lisse away from T . By induction Rn f! (Z/pm Z) is lisse away
from T for all m. Therefore Rn f! (Zp ) and hence Rn f! (Qp ) are lisse away from T .
    The final statement follows from Deligne, SGA 4 1/2 [21] [Arcata] V (3.1). 

5.2. Cyclotomic representations. Let E be a finite extension of Qp . Let K be
a finite extension of Q or Qp , and let V be a d-dimensional continuous E-linear
representation of Gal(K̄/K). Let us say that V is cyclotomic if there exist integers
j1 , . . . , jd such that V is isomorphic to E(j1 ) ⊕ · · · ⊕ E(jd ). Let us say that V
is potentially cyclotomic if there exists a finite extension L of K such that V is
cyclotomic as a representation of Gal(K̄/L).
    Observe that these concepts are independent of E in the sense that for any finite
extension E 0 of E, we have
(5.2.1)           E 0 ⊗E V is (potentially) cyclotomic if and only if V is.

     2The style of this section is somewhat clumsy. I hope to improve it in a future version.
                    Λ-RINGS AND THE FIELD WITH ONE ELEMENT                            17


5.3. Theorem. Let X be a separated scheme of finite type over Q. Suppose that
                       n
Gal(Q̄/Q) acts on Hét,c  (XQ̄ , Qp ) through its abelianization. Then there is an in-
                                             n
teger N ⩾ 1 such that the restriction of Hét,c  (XQ̄ , Qp ) to Gal(Q̄/Q(ζN )) is cyclo-
tomic.
   If X has a smooth and proper model over Z[1/M ], then N can be taken such that
all its prime divisors are divisors of M p.
                                                              n
Proof. By the main theorem of p-adic Hodge theory, Hét,c       (XQ̄ , Qp ) is a poten-
tially semi-stable representation of Gal(Q̄p /Qp ). (This is the work of many people.
See [41] for the final form of the theorem.) By 5.1, the set of ramified primes is
finite, and if X has a smooth proper model over Z[1/M ], it contains only primes
dividing M p. The theorem is then an immediate consequence of 5.4.                   
5.4. Theorem. Let E be a finite extension of Qp . Let T be a finite set of prime
numbers containing p, and let V be a finite-dimensional representation of GQ sat-
isfying the following properties:
    (a) GQ acts on V through its abelianization,
    (b) V is unramified away from T ,
    (c) V is potentially semi-stable at p.
Then there is an integer N divisible only by the primes in T such that the restriction
of V to Gal(Q̄/Q(ζN )) is cyclotomic.
Proof. By the Kronecker–Weber theorem, there is an integer n ⩾ 1, divisible only
by primes in T , such that the action of GQ,S on V factors through the cyclotomic
character GQ,S → (Z/nZ)∗ × Z∗p . Let H be the torsion subgroup of (Z/nZ)∗ × Z∗p .
Let us show that it is enough to consider the case where H acts trivially on V .
  Let G denote the quotient (Z/nZ)∗ × Z∗p /H. Since G ∼  = Zp , we have
                                     ∗    ∗ ∼
                             (Z/nZ) × Z = G × H.
                                            p

By (5.2.1), we can assume every irreducible E-linear representation of H is one-
dimensional. For each character ρ : H → E ∗ , let Vρ denote the summand of V on
which H acts via ρ. Since G × H is abelian, Vρ is stable under G × H. Therefore
we have a decomposition of Galois representations
                                       M
                                   V =     Vρ .
                                            ρ

It is enough to show each Vρ is potentially cyclotomic. On the other hand, because
each Vρ satisfies (a)–(c), it is enough to assume V = Vρ for some ρ. Now observe
that ρ, viewed as a Galois representation by the composition
                                                ρ
                                G × H −→ H −→ E ∗ ,
is potentially cyclotomic, since it is potentially trivial. Therefore it is enough to
show V ⊗ ρ−1 is potentially cyclotomic. Similarly, ρ−1 satisfies (a)–(c) above, and
hence so does V ⊗ ρ−1 . But H acts trivially on V ⊗ ρ−1 . Therefore it is indeed
enough to consider the case where H acts trivially on V .
   Let g be a pro-generator of G/H. By (5.2.1), it is sufficient to assume that E
contains all the eigenvalues of g acting on V . Then V has a g-stable filtration
                             0 = V0 ⊆ V1 ⊆ · · · ⊆ Vd = V
by sub-E-vector spaces such that dimE (Vi /Vi−1 ) = 1, for i = 1, . . . , d. Because g
is a pro-generator of G/H, the filtration is G/H-stable.
18                                    J. BORGER


   Because V is potentially semi-stable, so is each subquotient Vi /Vi−1 . For each
i, the lemma 5.5 implies there is finite extension Ki of Qp in Qp (ζp∞ ) such that
the action of Gal(Qp (ζp∞ )/Ki ) on Vi /Vi−1 is an integral power of the cyclotomic
character. Take an integer r ⩾ 0 such that Qp (ζpr ) contains K1 , . . . , Kd . Then the
action of Gal(Q(ζp∞ )/Qp (ζpr )) on Vi /Vi−1 is an integral power of the cyclotomic
character. In other words, V is an iterated extension of Gal(Q(ζp∞ )/Qp (ζpr ))-
representations of the form E(j). But by 5.6, it must then be a direct sum of such
representations. Thus it is cyclotomic as a representation of Gal(Q(ζp∞ )/Qp (ζpr )).
But because the natural map
                  Gal(Qp (ζp∞ )/Qp (ζpr )) −→ Gal(Q(ζp∞ )/Q(ζpr ))
is an isomorphism, V is cyclotomic as a representation of GQ(ζpr ) .                  

5.5. Lemma. Let E be a finite extension of Qp , and let V be a one-dimensional
E-vector space with a continuous E-linear action of Gal(Qp (ζp∞ )/Qp ). Assume
further that V is potentially semi-stable (as a Qp -representation of GQp ). Then
there is a finite extension K of Qp such that for some integer i, we have V ∼
                                                                            = E(i)
as representations of Gal(K(ζp∞ )/K).
Proof. Let d = [E : Qp ]. Let M be the weakly admissible module associated to V .
Then M inherits from V an action of E. That is, every e ∈ E acts as a morphism of
weakly admissible modules. Therefore the Hodge filtration on M is a filtration by
sub-E-modules and the Frobenius and monodromy operators are E-linear. Because
dimE (M ) = dimQp (M )/d = 1, there is an integer j such that F j M = M and
F j+1 M = 0, and there is an element α ∈ E such that the endomorphism ϕ of M
is multiplication by α. Therefore the the Hodge number of detQp (M ) is dj and the
slope is dvQp (α). Because M is weakly admissible, these two must be equal, and
so we have vQp (α) = j. Replacing M by M (−j), it suffices to assume j = 0. We
now want to show that M becomes trivial after a finite extension.
   Let k denote the residue field of K. Let M 0 = M ⊗W (k) W (k̄). Then M 0 is
a one-dimensional potentially semi-stable weakly admissible E-module over W (k̄)
with j = 0. Let us show that M 0 is isomorphic to the trivial weakly admissible
module.
   Let us now show that we can change basis of M 0 so that α = 1. (This is
a consequence of Manin’s theorem when E = Qp .) The ring E ⊗ W (k̄) has an
endomorphism id ⊗ σ. The ratio of this with the identity map gives a group endo-
morphism f of (E ⊗ W (k̄))∗ sending a ⊗ x 7→ a ⊗ σ(x)/x. We need to show this is
a surjection. Define a filtration Ai of (E ⊗ W (k̄))∗ by setting Ai
                         (A ⊗ W (k̄))∗ −→ (E/mi ⊗ W (k̄))∗ ,
where m is the maximal ideal of E. Because the ring E ⊗ W (k̄) is m-adically
complete, the group (E ⊗ W (k̄))∗ is complete with respect to this filtration. There-
fore it is enough to show f is surjective on the associated graded abelian group.
We have gr0 A = (E/m ⊗ k̄)∗ and for i ⩾ 1, we have gri A ≡ (mi /mi+1 ⊗ k̄) by
the map x 7→ x − 1. The map f becomes x 7→ xp−1 on gr0 A, and it becomes
a ⊗ x 7→ a ⊗ (xp − x) on gri A for i ⩾ 1. Because k̄ is algebraically closed, both
these maps are surjective.
   Let us now show that the monodromy operator N is zero. But this holds be-
cause ϕ and N are two E-linear endomorphisms of a one-dimensional vector space
                    Λ-RINGS AND THE FIELD WITH ONE ELEMENT                           19


satisfying ϕN = pN ϕ and ϕ 6= 0. And so the weakly admissible module associated
to the GQ⊗W (k̄) -representation V is trivial.
   Therefore there is a finite extension L of Q ⊗ W (k̄) such that GL acts trivially
on V . Therefore there is a finite extension K of Qp such that the inertia group
IK of GK acts trivially on V . Since the action of GQp on V factors through
Gal(Qp (ζp∞ )/Qp ), the action of GK .                                            

5.6. Lemma. Let E and K be finite extensions of Qp , and let V be a finite-
dimensional continuous E-representation of Gal(K(ζp∞ )/K(ζpb )). If V is Hodge–
Tate and has a semi-simplification which is isomorphic to a sum of cyclotomic
representations, then V itself is isomorphic to a sum of cyclotomic representations.
Proof. Let G denote Gal(K(ζp∞ )/K(ζpb )). Giving a representation of G is the
same as giving a representation of its Lie algebra, which is one-dimensional; and so
this is the same as giving a matrix θ. We have assumed that θ is upper-triangular
with only integers on the diagonal. One can change basis to make θ a block-
diagonal matrix, where each block is upper-triangular and has a single integer on
the diagonal. Therefore it is enough to assume θ has is upper triangular and has a
single integer on the diagonal. Twisting by a cyclotomic character, we can assume
θ is nilpotent.
   Thus it suffices to assume that V has a trivial semi-simplification. By induction
on dimE (V ), we need only prove that any Hodge–Tate extension W of the trivial
representation by itself is split. Therefore the representation is given by a group
map G → E into the upper-right corner of the matrix. Since the Hodge–Tate
weights of W are both 0, it must in fact be Cp -admissible. Therefore by Sen’s
theorem, it factors through finite quotient of G. But the only group map G → E
with this property is the trivial map. Therefore V is a split extension.           

                          6. p-adic étale cohomology
  Let X be a separated Λ-scheme of finite type over Z. Let rm,n denote the Hodge
number hm,m of Hcn (X an , C), where X an is the complex-analytic space underlying
X. (See Deligne [23], (2.3.7), for the definition of the Hodge numbers of a mixed
Hodge structure and Deligne [22] for the fact that Hcn (X an , C) carries a natural
mixed Hodge structure.) Let us write
                                  X
                          P (t) =    (−1)n rm,n tm ∈ Z[t].
                                   m,n

Finally, let us fix an algebraic closure Q̄ of Q.
                                                                 n
6.1. Theorem. For any integer s > 0, the action of Gal(Q̄/Q) on Hét,c (XQ̄ , Z/sZ)
                         ab
factors through Gal(Q̄/Q) .
Proof. By Deligne [21], [Arcata] IV (6.2), the sheaf Rn f! (Z/sZ) is constructible.
Therefore, there exists a finite Galois extension K/Q and an integer N > 0 such
that the restriction of Rn f! (Z/sZ) to Spec OK [1/N ] is the constant sheaf associated
to an abelian group V . Here, OK denotes the ring of integers of K. By functoriality
V has an action of G = Gal(K/Q). Let us also assume that N is a multiple of the
discriminant of K. By the base-change theorem, we have an isomorphism
                                 n
                                Hét,c (XQ̄ , Z/sZ) ∼
                                                    =V
20                                     J. BORGER


of representation of Gal(Q̄/Q) (which acts on V via the map to G). Therefore it
is enough to show the action of G on V is through its abelianization.
   Let p be a prime not dividing N . Let p be a prime of K over p, let kp denote
OK /p, and let D denote the decomposition subgroup of G corresponding to p.
Because p - N , the map D → Gal(kp /Fp ) is an isomorphism. By the proper
base-change theorem, we have an isomorphism
                              V ∼
                                = H n (X , Z/sZ)
                                        ét,c   F̄p

of representations of Gal(F̄p /Fp ). Further, the endomorphism ψp∗ of V (induced
by the endomorphism ψp of X) corresponds to the endomorphism Fr∗p of the right-
hand side. By generalities about the Frobenius map, Fr∗p acts on Hét,c
                                                                    n
                                                                        (XF̄p , Z/sZ)
as the inverse of the residual arithmetic Frobenius element Frobp ∈ D/I, the auto-
morphism defined by Frobp (x) = xp . Therefore ψp∗ acts on V in the same way as
Frob−1
     D where FrobD is the element of D mapping to Frobp .
   On the other hand, the endomorphisms ψp of X commute with each other as p
varies. Therefore the endomorphisms ψp∗ of Hét,c
                                                n
                                                    (XQ̄ , Z/sZ) commute with each
other. By the above, the action of any Frobenius elements FrobD for p - N , commute
with each other. By Chebotarev’s theorem (see Neukirch [49], V (6.4)), every
element of G is such a Frobenius element. Therefore G acts on V through its
abelianization.                                                                    
6.2. Corollary. For any prime number p, there is an integer N ⩾ 1 such that there
is an isomorphism of representations of Gal(Q̄/Q(ζN )):
                              (XQ̄ , Qp ) ∼
                                            M
(6.2.1)                  n
                       Hét,c             =   Qp (−m)rm,n .
                                                m

If X is smooth and proper over Z[1/M ], for some integer M > 0, then N can be
taken such that all its prime divisors are divisors of M p.
     Let us call an integer N > 0 satisfying the conclusion of 6.2 a conductor of X.
                                                                         n
Proof. By 6.1 and 5.3, there exists an integer N ⩾ 1 such that Hét,c       (XQ̄ , Qp ) is
a cyclotomic representation of Gal(Q̄/Q(ζN )). The fact that the multiplicities are
                                                     n
given by Hodge numbers as shown is because Hét,c       (XQ̄ , Qp ) is potentially semi-
stable. See Kisin [41] (3.2).
   Last, when X is smooth and proper over Z[1/M ], the Galois representation
  n
Hét,c (XQ̄ , Qp ) is unramified at primes not dividing M p, by 5.1. Then 5.3 implies
that N can be taken as asserted.                                                        
6.3. Remark. Note that the cohomology of the nodal curve of 2.6 when q = −1 is
non-pure mixed Tate, but the extension class is q = −1 ∈ Q∗ , which being torsion
vanishes when coefficients are taken in Qp . Therefore the Qp -cohomology is pure
mixed Tate, and there is no contradiction. On the other hand, the previous theorem
would be false with cohomology with coefficients in Z2 . It would be interesting to see
which other mixed Tate motives with torsion classes can be realized in Λ-algebraic
geometry.
6.4. Corollary. Let N be a conductor for X. Then there is a finite set T of prime
numbers such that for any finite field k whose cardinality q is relatively prime to
every element of T and satisfies q ≡ 1 mod N , the number of k-valued points of X
is P (q).
                    Λ-RINGS AND THE FIELD WITH ONE ELEMENT                            21


   More precisely, the set T can be taken such that it contains only prime numbers
p with the property that for every prime ` 6= p the sheaf Rn f! (Q` ) is not lisse at p,
where f denotes the map
                             X × Spec Z[1/`] → Spec Z.
Proof. Fix a prime number ` 6= p. Let T denote the set of prime numbers at which
Rn f! (Q` ) is not lisse. By 5.1, T is finite.
  Because of the restrictions on q, we have a factorization
                               a                        b
                       Spec k −→ Spec Z[ζN , T −1 ] −→ Spec Z.
Let Da denote a decomposition group in Gal(Q̄/Q(ζN )) at the point a, and let
k̄ denote the corresponding algebraic closure of k. Then since b∗ Rn f! (Q` ) is lisse,
the proper base change theorem implies
                           H n (X , Q` ) ∼
                                   k̄    = H n (X , Q` )
                                                   Q̄

as representations of Da , where Da acts on the left side through Gal(k̄/k). In par-
ticular, the trace of the geometric Frobenius element F ∈ Gal(k̄/k) on H n (Xk̄ , Q` )
agrees with the trace of the inverse of an arithmetic Frobenius element Froba of
Gal(Q̄/Q(ζN )) on H n (XQ̄ , Q` ).
   Therefore by the Lefschetz fixed-point formula (Houzel, SGA 5, exp. XV [2])
and 6.2, the number of Fq -valued points of X is
     X                                       X
         (−1)n tr(F | Hét,c
                         n
                             (XF̄q , Q` )) =  (−1)n tr(Frob−1   n
                                                           a | Hét,c (XQ̄ , Q` ))
      n                                    n
                                          X                 M
                                        =  (−1)n tr(Frob−1
                                                        a |   Q` (−m)rm,n )
                                           n                     m
                                          X      X
                                        =  (−1)n   rm,n q m = P (q).
                                           n         m
                                                                                      
6.5. Corollary. Let X be a smooth proper Λ-scheme over Z[1/M ]. Then there is
an integer N divisible only by the primes dividing M such that for all prime powers
q > 1 with q ≡ 1 mod N , the number of Fq -valued points of X is P (q).
                                n
Proof. The representation Hét,c  (XQ̄ , Qp ) of Gal(Q̄/Q) is unramified away from M ,
and so there is an integer N satisfying the property of 6.2 and such that it has the
same prime divisors as M .
   Now let q > 1 be a prime power with q ≡ 1 mod N . Let p be the prime number
dividing q, let ` 6= p be another prime number. Observe that p - M `.
   The map
                          f : X × Spec Z[1/`] → Spec Z[1/M `]
is smooth and proper, and so by Deligne (SGA 4 1/2, [Arcata] V (3.1) [21]), the
sheaf Rn f∗ (Q` ) is lisse. In particular, it is lisse at p. Therefore by 6.4, there is
a set of primes T not containing p such that the conclusion of 6.4 holds. Since
q ≡ 1 mod N , the number of Fq -valued points of X is P (q).                         
6.6. Corollary. Let X be a smooth proper scheme over F1 . Then for all prime
powers q > 1, the number of Fq -valued points of X is P (q).
Proof. This is 6.5 in the case M = 1.                                                 
22                                   J. BORGER


6.7. Remark. The number of complemented F1 -valued points of X equals P (1)
when X = An or X = Pn , with their toric Λ-structures. On the other hand, if X is
the Chebychev line (2.5), it has no complemented F1 -valued points, but P (1) = 1.
6.8. Remark. Some conditions on q of the kind in 6.4 are necessary. For example,
let X = Spec Z[ζN , 1/N M ]. For primes p dividing N M , let ψp = id; and for all
other p, let ψp be the unique Frobenius lift.
   Then r0,0 = φ(N ) and all other rm,n are zero. Therefore P (t) = φ(N ). On
the other hand, there are φ(N ) points in X(Fq ) if and only if both N M ∈ F∗q
and q ≡ 1 mod N . Furthermore the sheaf Rn f! (Q` ) is lisse exactly at the prime
numbers that do not divide N M .
6.9. Proposition. Let X be a nonempty separated Λ-scheme of finite type over Z.
Let P (t) and N be as in 6.1. Then for every prime p  0 and every integer r ⩾ 1
with pr ≡ 1 mod N , there is an Fq -valued point of X.
Proof. By 6.4, for every prime p not in set T supplied and for every integer r with
pr ≡ 1 mod N , the number of Fpr -valued points of X is P (pr ).
   On the other hand, it follows from general facts about Hodge numbers of varieties
proved by Deligne [24], (8.2.4), that P (t) → ∞ as t → ∞. Indeed, since XC
is nonempty, its dimension d is non-negative, the degree of P (t) is 2d, and the
coefficient of t2d is the number of connected components of XC , which is positive.
   Thus for sufficiently large p and all r as above, we see that the number of Fpr -
valued points is P (pr ) and that P (pr ) is positive.                            
6.10. Theorem. Let X be a nonempty separated Λ-scheme of finite type over Z.
Then there is a nonempty closed Λ-subscheme Z of X which is étale over Z.
Proof. Let us first reduce to the case where X is reduced and quasi-finite over
Z. Define a sequence X0 ⊇ X1 ⊇ · · · of nonempty closed sub-Λ-schemes of X
recursively as follows: Let X0 = X. For n ⩾ 0, assume Xn has already been
defined. Then let p = pn+1 be a prime number distinct from p1 , . . . , pn such that
Xn has an Fp -valued point x. This exists by 6.9. (For definiteness, we can take
p to be the smallest such prime, say.) Let Xn+1 be the fixed locus of Xn under
ψp , which is to say the equalizer in the category of Λ-spaces of ψp : Xn → Xn and
the identity map. Because Xn is separated, Xn+1 is a closed sub-Λ-scheme of Xn .
Because x is an Fp -valued point of Xn , it is fixed by the Frobenius map on the
special fiber of Xn over p. Therefore it is fixed by ψp , and so x is also a point of
Xn+1 . In particular,
            T         Xn+1 is nonempty.
   Let Z = n⩾0 Xn . Because X is of finite type over Z, it is noetherian. Therefore
there is an integer n ⩾ 0 such that Z = Xn . It follows that Z is nonempty
and, by 3.2, it is also affine and quasi-finite over Z. Therefore we can assume
X = Z = Spec B, where B is quasi-finite over Z. Since the reduced subscheme
of any nonzero Λ-ring of finite type over Z is the same, we can also assume B is
reduced.
   Now let us show that B has a quotient Λ-ring which is étale over Z. Suppose
B is not étale over Z at some prime p. For each integer m ⩾ 1, let Im denote the
kernel of ψm : B → B. The Λ-ideals Im are ordered by divisibility on m, and the
ordering is cofinal. Let I denote the Λ-ideal ∪m Im , and let C denote the quotient
of B/I by the ideal of torsion elements. Then C is a Λ-ring quotient of C and,
hence, of B. Note that 1 6∈ I, so B/I is a nonzero Λ-ring. But 1 is not a torsion
                    Λ-RINGS AND THE FIELD WITH ONE ELEMENT                             23


element in any nonzero Λ-ring. Therefore C is nonzero and is flat, quasi-finite, and
of finite type over Z. Let us finally show that C is actually étale over Z.
   For each integer m ⩾ 1, the endomorphism ψm of C is injective. Indeed, if b is
a lift to B of any element of the kernel, then nψm (b) = 0 for some integer n ⩾ 1.
Therefore ψm (nb) = 0 and hence nb = 0 and hence b is torsion. Therefore the
image of b in C is 0.
   Now let p be a prime. Since ψp is an injective endomorphism of C, it induces an
injective endomorphism of Q⊗Z C. Since Q⊗Z C is finite over Q, this endomorphism
is in fact an automorphism of finite order. Since C is flat over Z, we have C ⊆
Q⊗Z C, and so ψp is an automorphism of C. Therefore the Frobenius endomorphism
of C/pC is an automorphism. Thus C/pC is reduced, and so C is étale at p.         

6.11. Corollary. Let X be a nonempty proper scheme over F1 . Then X(F1 ) 6= ∅.
Proof. The scheme Z supplied by 6.10 is proper and étale over Z. Therefore each of
its finitely many connected components must be Spec Z, by Minkowski’s theorem.
But the only Λ-structure on such a space is the disjoint-union Λ-structure. Indeed,
it is flat over Z, so it suffices to show that every Frobenius lift ψp is the identity.
But the Frobenius map on each special fiber is the identity. Since Z is a disjoint
union of copies of Spec Z, each ψp must be the identity.
    Therefore Z, as a nonempty disjoint union of copies of Spec F1 , has an F1 -valued
point, and hence so does X.                                                          

6.12. Corollary. Let U a nonempty open Λ-subscheme of a Λ-scheme X which is
proper over Z. Then U has a Q-valued Λ-point.
Proof. By the theorem above, there is a nonempty closed Λ-subscheme Z of U which
is étale over Z. Let Y denote the closure of Z in X with the reduced subscheme
structure. Then Y is a closed Λ-subscheme of X. (Basic property of Λ-ideals.)
Because Y is reduced, it is flat. Because it is the closure of Z it is generically finite
over Z. A closed subscheme of X, it is therefore finite over Z. By 6.11, it has an
Z-valued Λ-point, and hence a Q-valued Λ-point. Since we have
             Spec Q ×Spec Z Y = Spec Q ×Spec Z Z ⊆ Spec Q ×Spec Z U,
we see that U has a Q-valued Λ-point.                                                  

6.13. Remark. The condition that such a compactification X exists cannot be
dropped. For example, for any integer n > 0, we can make Z[ζn , 1/n] a Λ-ring by
taking ψp to be anything for p | n, and to be the unique choice ζn 7→ ζnp for p - n.
But this ring has no maps to Q.

6.14. For any F1 -valued point x of X, let Zx denote the closure of the pre-images
of x under the maps ψp , viewed as a reduced closed subscheme. Then Zx is a
complemented closed Λ-subspace of X. Therefore the assignment x 7→ Zx defines
a function
     {F1 -points of X} −→ {complemented reduced closed Λ-subspaces of X}.
6.15. Corollary. Let X be a proper Λ-scheme over Z. Assume that X is irreducible
as a scheme. Then there is a Z-valued Λ-point x such that Zx = X.
24                                           J. BORGER


Proof. Since the set X(F1 ) is finite and complementary closed Λ-subschemes are
stable under finite union, the union
                                         [
                                  Z=         Zx ,
                                              x∈X(F1 )

with its reduced scheme structure is a complementary closed Λ-subscheme. By
construction, there are no Q-valued Λ-points of X − Z. Therefore by 6.12, this is
only possible if X = Z. Finally since Z is irreducible, we must have Zx = X for
some x ∈ X(F1 ).                                                               

                                            7. Variants
  One of the motivations behind work on the field with one element has been to
imitate over number fields the theory of function fields over a finite field k, where we
can work over the absolute point Spec k. But Λ-algebraic geometry works perfectly
well over function fields, too. So we can compare k-algebras to the function-field
analogues of F1 -algebras.
7.1. ΛS,E -spaces. Let S be a scheme of finite type over Z, and let E be a set of
regular closed points of codimension 1. For each point s ∈ E, let qs denote the
cardinality of s. Let X be a flat algebraic space over S. We can then define a ΛS,E -
action on X just as we define Λ-actions, but now we use commuting endomorphisms
ψs : X → X, one for each point s ∈ E, such that ψs agrees with the qs -power
Frobenius operator on the fiber Xs . (See [7].) If E is the set of all regular closed
points of codimension 1, then we write ΛS = ΛS,E . For example, if S = Spec Z,
then a ΛS -space is just a Λ-space.
   The general theory works just as well when S is arbitrary. Thus we get a topos
SpFS,E , whose objects we call spaces over the generalized field with one element
      1

FS,E      0      0                                               0
  1 . If S and E are another instance of this data, and a : S → S is a map such
             0
that a(E) ⊆ E , we have a diagram of toposes
(7.1.1)                             SpS
                                                v    / Sp S,E
                                                          F1

                                       a                      b

                                               v0
                                                          
                                    SpS 0            / Sp S0 ,E0
                                                         F1

rendered commutative by a certain invertible 2-morphism. Here b is as in [7].
   In particular, SpF1 is the deepest.
7.2. Function fields. Let q denote the cardinality of k, and let S be a smooth
geometrically connected curve over k. We will now construct a factorization of
topos maps
(7.2.1)                       SpS
                                                v            / SpFS
                                    HH                      u
                                                                  1
                                      HH s              f u
                                        HH               u
                                           HH          u
                                             H#    zu
                                            SpSpec k .
     Let us first define f ∗ (T ) for affine (or algebraic) T . As a space, set
                                       f ∗ (T ) = S ×k T.
                   Λ-RINGS AND THE FIELD WITH ONE ELEMENT                           25


Since S ×k T is flat over S, giving a ΛS -action on S ×k T , is the same as giving
a commuting family of Frobenius lifts. For any maximal ideal m of OS , define
ψm : S ×k T → S ×k T by ψm = idS × Frm                  m
                                            T , where FrT denotes the endomorphism
of T which on OT acts as x 7→ x , where qm denotes the cardinality of the residue
                                  qm

field OS /m. It is clear the ψm commute with each other and lift the appropriate
Frobenius maps.
    The functor Aff S → SpFS1 just defined preserves covering families. Indeed, a map
U → V in SpFS1 is an epimorphism if and only if the induced map v ∗ U → v ∗ V is.
But v ∗ f ∗ preserves covering families. Therefore f ∗ does.
    For a similar reason, f ∗ sends products to products. Therefore it extends
uniquely to a topos map f : SpFS1 → SpSpec k , which yields the commutative di-
agram (7.2.1).
    In fact, f is essential, meaning that f ∗ has a left adjoint, denoted f! . We let
f! (U ) be the colimit of the coequalizers of the diagrams
                                            Frm
                                              U
                                                  /
                                       U              /U
                                            ψm

over all m. In other words, f! (U ) is the largest quotient U 0 of U on which each ψm
acts as Frm                                          ∗
          U 0 . This is clearly the left adjoint of f .

7.3. f is not an isomorphism of toposes. For example, let T be an affine space
over S, the unit of the adjunction f! a f ∗ at v! (T ) is
(7.3.1)                    v! (T ) −→ f ∗ f! v! (T ) = f ∗ s! (T )
which, by definition, is a map
(7.3.2)                           WS (T ) −→ S ×k T,
where WS := WS,E is the E-typical Witt vector functor over S. (See [7].) The
composition            a      γ
                           T −→ WS (T ) −→ S ×k T.
                           N(E)
with the ghost map γ is the map that, on the component n ∈ N(E) , is simply
                                      (pr,Frn
                                            T)
                                  T               / S ×k T

where pr denotes the structure map T → S, and FrnT is the Frobenius map defined
                          deg(n)
on functions by x 7→ xq
                                                       P
                                 , where deg(n) denotes m nm [OS /m : k], the degree
of the effective divisor corresponding to n.
   In particular, if T = S, then the image of this map is the union in S ×k S of
the graphs of all powers of the Frobenius map on S. These components are not
disjoint. For instance, let x and y be two distinct closed points of S with the same
residue field. Then the the components of WS (S) of indices x and y are distinct
but have the same image in S ×k S. So (7.3.1) is not a monomorphism. Therefore
f! is not faithful, and hence f is not an isomorphism of toposes. One can also show
that (7.3.1) is not an epimorphism.
   But the image of (7.3.2), or equivalently (7.3.1), does see much of the geometry
of S ×k T . Another way of expressing the point of this paper is that it is reasonable
to think of it as being almost an isomorphism. For example, we have the following
result.
26                                    J. BORGER


7.4. Proposition. The map
                                 WS (T ) −→ S ×k T
of (7.3.2) has Zariski dense image.
Proof. Let m be a maximal ideal of OS with residue cardinality r. It suffices to
show the image of the composition
                     N × T −→ N(E) × T −→ WS (T ) −→ S ×k T
                                                    
is dense. The map satisfies (n, t) 7→ h(t), Frrn (t) .
    We may assume S and T are affine. Indeed, it suffices to show density locally.
Therefore we can replace S with an affine open subscheme S 0 and replace T with
T 0 = S 0 ×S T . We can then replace T 0 with an affine scheme T 00 mapping to T 0 by
an étale map.
    Let us then write S = Spec R and T = Spec B, where R is a Dedekind domain
and B is an R-algebra. In terms of rings, the map in question is
(7.4.1)                       R ⊗k B −→ B × B × . . .
                                          2
and is defined by a ⊗ b 7→ hab, abr , abr , . . .i. We need to show that any element of
its kernel is nilpotent.
           Pd
   So let j=1 aj ⊗bj be an element of its kernel. Assume without loss of generality
that the elements aj are linearly independent over k. Then for every m ∈ N, we have
         rm
P
   j aj bj  = 0. Applying various powers of Frr , we have the system of equations
                                    d
                                    X         i   d
                                          arj brj = 0
                                    j=1

where i = 0, . . . , d − 1. This can be expressed as the matrix equation
                                          i       d
                                       arj ij · brj j = 0.
                                                                        i
Since the family a1 , . . . , ad is linearly independent, the matrix arj has nonzero
determinant. (This is the Moore matrix from the theory of function fields. The
vanishing of its determinant is equivalent to the linear dependence of the aj . The
proof is by a degree argument, just as for the familiar, analogous result about
                                                       d
Vandermonde matrices.) Therefore we have brj = 0 for all j. It follows that the
element
                                        X  d         r d
                                              aj ⊗ bj
                                      j=1
is zero. So every element of the kernel of (7.4.1) is nilpotent.                     
7.5. Corollary. Let X and Y be separated reduced algebraic spaces over k. Then
any map f! f ∗ X → Y factors uniquely through the map f! f ∗ X → X.
Proof. Consider the composite map
                               S × X −→ f! f ∗ X −→ Y,
and let Γ = (S × X) ×Y (S × X) denote the induced equivalence relation on S × X.
Recall that f! f ∗ X is defined to be the quotient of S × X by the equivalence relation
Γ0 generated by the image of W (S × X) in S × S × X under the map (7.3.2) when
T = S ×k X. Therefore Γ contains Γ0 . On the other hand, by 7.4, Γ0 is dense in
                    Λ-RINGS AND THE FIELD WITH ONE ELEMENT                           27


Γ00 = S × S × X = (S × X) ×X (S × X). Therefore Γ agrees with Γ00 , and so the
map S × X → Y factors uniquely through the quotient of S × X by Γ00 , which is
just X.                                                                     
7.6. Corollary. The functor f ∗ : Spk → SpFS1 is faithful, and it embeds the full sub-
category of separated reduced algebraic spaces over k fully faithfully in the category
SpFS1 .
   Some restriction on nilpotent elements is necessary. For example, suppose S =
Spec R. Let A be a non-reduced k-algebra. Choose a square-zero element a ∈ A
and an element r in R but not in k. Then the element r ⊗ a of R ⊗k A does not lie
in the subring A. On the other hand, we have (r ⊗ a)qm = 0 = r ⊗ aqm = ψm (r ⊗ a)
for any maximal ideal m of R. Therefore the map f! f ∗ Spec A → Spec A is not an
isomorphism, because r ⊗ a is a function on the affinization of f! f ∗ Spec A that does
not come from A.
7.7. Analogy. It is rare for the pull-back functor for a map of spaces to be fully
faithful. So let us consider a similar, but more familiar situation where this happens.
Let S be a complex algebraic space and let Γ be an equivalence relation on S which
is Zariski dense in S × S. For instance, Γ could be given by the action of a discrete
group with a dense orbit or, if S is connected, by the formal neighborhood of the
diagonal. Then algebraic spaces (perhaps under some mild conditions) form a full
subcategory of the category of Γ-equivariant spaces over S. The condition for a
Γ-equivariant algebraic space X over S to descend to the point is then a property
on X, rather than a structure. We might then say the Γ-action is uniform, or
constant.
    Therefore, following the previous corollary, it is natural to interpret a descent
datum on a reduced algebraic space X over S to the point Spec k as being a descent
datum to FS1 with a similar algebraic uniformity property. So, objects of FS1 are
generalized—but not weakened—versions of separated reduced algebraic spaces over
the point Spec k. Of course this makes essential use of equal characteristic. The
corresponding interpretation of Λ-spaces in the usual sense, over Z, would be that
while it is possible to say what it means to descend an algebraic space to F1 —that
is, to give it a Λ-action—we do not know if there is a uniformity property, which is
what we would need to create a true arithmetic analogue of the base point Spec k.
    (Buium has come to similar ideas independently. He proposed in conversation
that it might be reasonable to consider a Λ-structure on a scheme as being an
isotrivialization relative to F1 .)
7.8. Drinfeld modules. Using the theory of Drinfeld modules, we can give examples
of objects of SpFS1 that do not descend to Spk .
   Let C be a connected smooth projective curve over Fp , let ∞ ∈ C be a closed
point, and let A = Γ(C − {∞}, OC ). Let S be a smooth Fp -curve over which there
is a Drinfeld A-module
                                 ϕ : A → EndS (Ga )
of rank 1 and of generic characteristic. (See Laumon [46] section (1.2), say.)
   Then for any closed point s of S, the fiber of ϕ over s gives a Drinfeld R-module
ϕs over s of rank 1. Because of the assumption that ϕ has generic characteristic, the
characteristic of ϕs is s. A basic result of Drinfeld’s ([46] (2.2.2)(ii)) then implies
that there is a unique element Πs ∈ A such that ϕs (Πs ) is the qs -th power Frobenius
28                                   J. BORGER


endomorphism of Ga over s, where qs denotes the residue cardinality of s. If we
set ψs = ϕ(Πs ), then the various ψs are commuting endomorphisms of Ga over S,
each agreeing with the qs -power Frobenius map on the fiber over s. This gives a
ΛS -structure on Ga (which also respects the group structure).
   For example, the Carlitz module is defined when A = Fp [t] and S = Spec A by
ρ(t) = t + τ , where τ is the Frobenius map of Ga . Then for each maximal ideal m
of k[t], the operator ψm is ρ(f (t)), where f (t) denotes the monic generator of m.
   Observe that none of these “Drinfeld ΛS -structures” on A1S descends from SpFS1
to Spk . Indeed, for every object in the image of f ∗ , the operators ψs act as zero
on the conormal sheaf of the identity section S ⊂ Ga . But ϕ was assumed to have
generic characteristic. Therefore every Πs acts faithfully on the conormal sheaf,
and hence so does every ψs .
   Another important use of the construction S × X is in the study of shtukas, also
due to Drinfeld. Indeed, it is possible to mimic this using WS (X) instead of S × X.
And this concept can be translated to number fields. This paper is not, however,
the place to discuss this in any detail.


7.9. Complex multiplication by number fields. Let R be a Dedekind domain whose
field of fractions is a number field. Assume that there is an abelian scheme X over
R of dimension d having the property that Q ⊗ EndR (X) contains a field F of
degree 2d over Q.
    As above, X has a natural ΛR -structure. For each maximal ideal m of R, there
is a unique element πm ∈ F ∩ EndR (X) such that πm induces the qm -th power
Frobenius map on the fiber of X over m. (See Serre–Tate [54].) Because each πm
lies in F , they all commute. Therefore putting ψm = πm is a ΛR -structure on X.
    Observe that we can modify X to make ΛR -varieties that are not CM varieties
in the usual sense. For instance, let G is a finite subgroup of AutR (X). Be-
cause every automorphism commutes with the complex multiplications, G acts
ΛR -equivariantly on X. Therefore the quotient X/G is also a ΛR -space. (Because
G is finite, the quotient is an algebraic space, by Artin’s theorem.) For instance,
if X is an elliptic curve and G = Aut(X), then X/G is a projective line.
    In particular, it seems likely that explicit class field theory for imaginary qua-
dratic fields could be expressed in terms of ΛR -structures on P1 , just like in the
case of Q and function fields.
    Suppose instead that R is a Dedekind domain whose field of fractions is a real
quadratic number field. In light of Ritt’s work [51][52], it seems unlikely that there
are ΛR -actions on P1 which do not come from ΛZ -actions. It might, however, be
possible to find such ΛR -actions on surfaces or higher-dimensional varieties, and
any example would without a doubt lead to another example of an explicit class
field theory. Of course, it would only be interesting if it could see more than the
maximal cyclotomic extension of R. On the other hand, it would also be interesting
to prove that no such examples exist.
    Here are some precise questions. Is there an algebraic ΛR -space X of finite type
over R with the property that for any abelian étale R-algebra R0 , the ΛR -space
Spec R0 ×Spec R X is not isomorphic as a ΛR -space to one of the form Spec R0 ×Spec Z
Y , for any algebraic ΛZ -space Y ? (Abelian here means that Q ⊗Z R0 is a product of
abelian extensions of Q ⊗Z R.) Are there any algebraic ΛR -spaces X of finite type
over R whose generic fiber is geometrically connected and which do not descend to
                      Λ-RINGS AND THE FIELD WITH ONE ELEMENT                                    29


ΛZ -spaces? I do not even know if many particular varieties can be ruled out: are
there any ΛR -structures on X = P2R with this property?

7.10. Local number fields. Let S = Spec Z, let p be a prime number, and let
E = {p}. Let us write ΛS,E = Λp . The corresponding Witt functor Wn∗ = WS,E,n     ∗

is, up to re-indexing, the p-typical Witt vector functor defined by Witt [65] in 1936.
Of course, Λp -rings and p-typical Witt vectors are now ubiquitous in work on p-adic
cohomology. (See [17] or [37], say.)
    Now let A be a complete discrete valuation ring with perfect residue field k of
characteristic p. If A is of equal characteristic, then the map A → k has a unique
section. Now suppose A has mixed characteristic. Of course A → k cannot have
a section defined over Z, but remarkably, it does have a unique section defined
over FS,E
        1 , the p-typical field with one element, and hence over F1 . By definition,
this means that the map W (A) → W (k) of Λp -rings has a unique section. Indeed,
because k is perfect, there is a unique ring map W (k) → A compatible with the
projections to k. (See [53], say.) By adjointness, this then lifts to a unique map
W (k) → W (A) of Λp -rings, which is easily seen to be a section of the map in
question.

                                         References
 [1] Théorie des topos et cohomologie étale des schémas. Tome 1: Théorie des topos. Springer-
     Verlag, Berlin, 1972. Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique du Bois-Marie 1963–1964 (SGA 4),
     Dirigé par M. Artin, A. Grothendieck, et J. L. Verdier. Avec la collaboration de N. Bourbaki,
     P. Deligne et B. Saint-Donat, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 269.
 [2] Cohomologie l-adique et fonctions L. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 589. Springer-
     Verlag, Berlin, 1977. Séminaire de Géometrie Algébrique du Bois-Marie 1965–1966 (SGA 5),
     Edité par Luc Illusie.
 [3] John     Baez.     This    week’s    finds    in    mathematical      physics   (week    184).
     http://www.math.ucr.edu/home/baez/week184.html.
 [4] James Borger and Bart de Smit. Galois theory and integral models of Λ-rings. Bulletin of the
     London Mathematical Society. To appear.
 [5] James Borger and Ben Wieland. Plethystic algebra. Adv. Math., 194(2):246–283, 2005.
 [6] James M. Borger. The basic geometry of Witt vectors. arXiv:0801.1691v2.
 [7] James M. Borger. Sheaves in Λ-algebraic geometry. To appear.
 [8] Alexandru Buium. Differential subgroups of simple algebraic groups over p-adic fields. Amer.
     J. Math., 120(6):1277–1287, 1998.
 [9] Alexandru Buium. Arithmetic differential equations, volume 118 of Mathematical Surveys
     and Monographs. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2005.
[10] Alexandru Buium. Geometry of Fermat adeles. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 357(3):901–964
     (electronic), 2005.
[11] Alexandru Buium and Santiago R. Simanca. Arithmetic Laplacians. Adv. Math., 220(1):246–
     277, 2009.
[12] F. J. B. J. Clauwens. Commuting polynomials and λ-ring structures on Z[x]. J. Pure Appl.
     Algebra, 95(3):261–269, 1994.
[13] Alain Connes and Caterina Consani. On the notion of geometry over F1 .
     arXiv:math/0809.2926, version dated 2008/09/17.
[14] Alain Connes, Caterina Consani, and Matilde Marcoli. Fun with F1 . arXiv:math/0806.2401,
     version dated 2008/06/14.
[15] Brian Conrad. Deligne’s notes on Nagata compactifications. J. Ramanujan Math. Soc.,
     22(3):205–257, 2007.
[16] A. A. Davydov. Periodic λ-rings and periods of finite groups. Mat. Sb., 188(8):75–82, 1997.
[17] A. J. de Jong. Barsotti-Tate groups and crystals. In Proceedings of the International Congress
     of Mathematicians, Vol. II (Berlin, 1998), number Extra Vol. II, pages 259–265 (electronic),
     1998.
30                                          J. BORGER


[18] Anton Deitmar. F1 -schemes and toric varieties. arXiv:0608.5179, version dated 2007/11/29.
[19] Anton Deitmar. Schemes over F1 . In Number fields and function fields—two parallel worlds,
     volume 239 of Progr. Math., pages 87–100. Birkhäuser Boston, Boston, MA, 2005.
[20] Anton Deitmar. Remarks on zeta functions and K-theory over F1 . Proc. Japan Acad. Ser.
     A Math. Sci., 82(8):141–146, 2006.
[21] P. Deligne. Cohomologie étale. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 569. Springer-Verlag,
     Berlin, 1977. Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique du Bois-Marie SGA 4 12 , Avec la collabora-
     tion de J. F. Boutot, A. Grothendieck, L. Illusie et J. L. Verdier.
[22] Pierre Deligne. Théorie de Hodge. I. In Actes du Congrès International des Mathématiciens
     (Nice, 1970), Tome 1, pages 425–430. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1971.
[23] Pierre Deligne. Théorie de Hodge. II. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math., (40):5–57, 1971.
[24] Pierre Deligne. Théorie de Hodge. III. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math., (44):5–77, 1974.
[25] Christopher Deninger. Evidence for a cohomological approach to analytic number theory. In
     First European Congress of Mathematics, Vol. I (Paris, 1992), volume 119 of Progr. Math.,
     pages 491–510. Birkhäuser, Basel, 1994.
[26] Yves Diers. Categories of commutative algebras. Oxford Science Publications. The Clarendon
     Press Oxford University Press, New York, 1992.
[27] Nikolai Durov. New approach to arakelov geometry. arXiv:0704.2030, version dated
     2007/04/16.
[28] William Fulton. Introduction to toric varieties, volume 131 of Annals of Mathematics Studies.
     Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1993.
[29] Marvin J. Greenberg. Schemata over local rings. Ann. of Math. (2), 73:624–648, 1961.
[30] Marvin J. Greenberg. Schemata over local rings. II. Ann. of Math. (2), 78:256–266, 1963.
[31] Alexander Grothendieck. La théorie des classes de Chern. Bull. Soc. Math. France, 86:137–
     154, 1958.
[32] Alexander Grothendieck. Éléments de géométrie algébrique. III. Étude cohomologique des
     faisceaux cohérents. I. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math., (11):167, 1961.
[33] Alexander Grothendieck. Éléments de géométrie algébrique. IV. Étude locale des schémas et
     des morphismes de schémas. III. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math., (28):255, 1966.
[34] Alexander Grothendieck. Pursuing stacks. Written 1983. Unpublished.
[35] M. J. Shai Haran. The mysteries of the real prime, volume 25 of London Mathematical Society
     Monographs. New Series. The Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, New York, 2001.
[36] M. J. Shai Haran. Non-additive geometry. Compos. Math., 143(3):618–688, 2007.
[37] Luc Illusie. Finiteness, duality, and Künneth theorems in the cohomology of the de Rham-
     Witt complex. In Algebraic geometry (Tokyo/Kyoto, 1982), volume 1016 of Lecture Notes in
     Math., pages 20–72. Springer, Berlin, 1983.
[38] M. Kapranov. Some conjectures on the absolute direct image. 1995 May 26. Unpublished.
[39] M. Kapranov and A. Smirnov. Cohomology determinants and reciprocity laws: number field
     case. Unpublished.
[40] M. Kisin and G. I. Lehrer. Equivariant Poincaré polynomials and counting points over finite
     fields. J. Algebra, 247(2):435–451, 2002.
[41] Mark Kisin. Potential semi-stability of p-adic étale cohomology. Israel J. Math., 129:157–173,
     2002.
[42] Shin-ya Koyama and Nobushige Kurokawa. Multiple zeta functions: the double sine function
     and the signed double Poisson summation formula. Compos. Math., 140(5):1176–1190, 2004.
[43] Nobushige Kurokawa. Multiple zeta functions: an example. In Zeta functions in geometry
     (Tokyo, 1990), volume 21 of Adv. Stud. Pure Math., pages 219–226. Kinokuniya, Tokyo,
     1992.
[44] Nobushige Kurokawa. Zeta functions over F1 . Proc. Japan Acad. Ser. A Math. Sci.,
     81(10):180–184 (2006), 2005.
[45] Nobushige Kurokawa, Hiroyuki Ochiai, and Masato Wakayama. Absolute derivations and
     zeta functions. Doc. Math., (Extra Vol.):565–584 (electronic), 2003. Kazuya Kato’s fiftieth
     birthday.
[46] Gérard Laumon. Cohomology of Drinfeld modular varieties. Part I, volume 41 of Cambridge
     Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996. Geometry,
     counting of points and local harmonic analysis.
[47] Yuri Manin. Cyclotomy and analytic geometry over F1 . arXiv:0809.1564, version dated
     2008/09/09.
                       Λ-RINGS AND THE FIELD WITH ONE ELEMENT                                       31


[48] Yuri Manin. Lectures on zeta functions and motives (according to Deninger and Kurokawa).
     Astérisque, (228):4, 121–163, 1995. Columbia University Number Theory Seminar (New York,
     1992).
[49] Jürgen Neukirch. Class field theory, volume 280 of Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wis-
     senschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
     1986.
[50] K. H. Paranjape and V. Srinivas. Self-maps of homogeneous spaces. Invent. Math., 98(2):425–
     444, 1989.
[51] J. F. Ritt. Permutable rational functions. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 25(3):399–448, 1923.
[52] J. F. Ritt. Errata: “Permutable rational functions”. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 26(4):494,
     1924.
[53] Jean-Pierre Serre. Corps locaux. Hermann, Paris, 1968. Deuxième édition, Publications de
     l’Université de Nancago, No. VIII.
[54] Jean-Pierre Serre and John Tate. Good reduction of abelian varieties. Ann. of Math. (2),
     88:492–517, 1968.
[55] A. L. Smirnov. Hurwitz inequalities for number fields. Algebra i Analiz, 4(2):186–209, 1992.
[56] Alexandr L. Smirnov. Letter to Y. Manin. September 29, 2003.
[57] Christophe Soulé. Les variétés sur le corps à un élément. Mosc. Math. J., 4(1):217–244, 312,
     2004.
[58] R. Steinberg. A geometric approach to the representations of the full linear group over a
     Galois field. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 71:274–282, 1951.
[59] John Tate and José Felipe Voloch. Linear forms in p-adic roots of unity. Internat. Math. Res.
     Notices, (12):589–601, 1996.
[60] J. Tits. Sur les analogues algébriques des groupes semi-simples complexes. In Colloque
     d’algèbre supérieure, tenu à Bruxelles du 19 au 22 décembre 1956, Centre Belge de Recherches
     Mathématiques, pages 261–289. Établissements Ceuterick, Louvain, 1957.
[61] Bertrand Toën and Michel Vaquié. Au-dessous de Spec Z. arXiv:math/0509684, version dated
     2007/10/05.
[62] Theo van den Bogaart and Bas Edixhoven. Algebraic stacks whose number of points over finite
     fields is a polynomial. In Number fields and function fields—two parallel worlds, volume 239
     of Progr. Math., pages 39–49. Birkhäuser Boston, Boston, MA, 2005.
[63] Chin-Lung Wang. Cohomology theory in birational geometry. J. Differential Geom.,
     60(2):345–354, 2002.
[64] André Weil. On the Riemann hypothesis in functionfields. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.,
     27:345–347, 1941.
[65] Ernst Witt. Zyklische Körper und Algebren der Charakteristik p vom Grad pn . Struktur
     diskret bewerter perfekter Körper mit vollkommenem Restklassen-körper der charakteristik
     p. J. Reine Angew. Math., (176), 1937.

   Australian National University, Canberra
   E-mail address: borger@maths.anu.edu.au
