                                              EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC
                                                           GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS

                                                                        JAMES BORGER, BART DE SMIT


                                                   Abstract. We consider generalized Λ-structures on algebras and schemes over




arXiv:1809.02295v1 [math.NT] 7 Sep 2018
                                                   the ring of integers OK of a number field K. When K “ Q, these agree with
                                                   the λ-ring structures of algebraic K-theory. We then study reduced finite flat
                                                   Λ-rings over OK and show that the maximal ones are classified in a Galois
                                                   theoretic manner by the ray class monoid of Deligne and Ribet. Second, we
                                                   show that the periodic loci on any Λ-scheme of finite type over OK generate
                                                   a canonical family of abelian extensions of K. This raises the possibility that
                                                   Λ-schemes could provide a framework for explicit class field theory, and we
                                                   show that the classical explicit class field theories for the rational numbers
                                                   and imaginary quadratic fields can be set naturally in this framework. This
                                                   approach has the further merit of allowing for some precise questions in the
                                                   spirit of Hilbert’s 12th Problem.
                                                      In an interlude which might be of independent interest, we define rings of
                                                   periodic big Witt vectors and relate them to the global class field theoretical
                                                   mathematics of the rest of the paper.




                                                                                    Contents
                                             1. Introduction                                                                               2

                                          Part 1. Finite Λ-rings and class field theory                                                    7
                                            2. Maximal Λ-orders                                                                            7
                                            3. The local case                                                                              7
                                            4. The ray class monoid                                                                       10
                                            5. Global arguments                                                                           12

                                          Part 2. Periodic loci and explicit class field theory                                           15
                                            6. Λ-schemes                                                                                  15
                                            7. Periodic Λ-schemes                                                                         15
                                            8. Periodic loci and abelian extensions                                                       17
                                            9. Interlude on periodic Witt vectors                                                         19
                                            10. K “ Q: the toric line and the Chebyshev line                                              22
                                            11. K imaginary quadratic: CM elliptic curves and the Lattès scheme                          25
                                            12. Further questions                                                                         34
                                            References                                                                                    36




                                             Date: September 10, 2018.
                                             The first part of this paper is a revision of our note [6], which has had some circulation since
                                          2006 and has been used by Yalkinoglu [24] and Uramoto [21].
                                                                                          1
2                               J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


                                  1. Introduction
   Let A be a Dedekind domain with fraction field K. Let P be a set of maximal
ideals of A such that for each p P P , the residue field kppq “ A{p has finite car-
dinality N ppq. We will be most interested in the case where K is a number field
or local field, A is the full ring of integers OK of K, and P is the set MK of all
maximal ideals of OK .
   Let B be a (commutative) A-algebra. Then for each p P P the algebra B{pB “
BbA kppq over kppq has a natural kppq-algebra endomorphism Fp : x ÞÑ xN ppq , which
is called the Frobenius endomorphism. By a Frobenius lift on B at p we mean an
A-algebra endomorphism ψp : B Ñ B such that ψp b kppq “ Fp .
   We define a ΛA,P -structure on B to be a set map P Ñ EndA-alg pEq, denoted
p ÞÑ ψp , such that
    (1) ψp is a Frobenius lift at p for each p P P .
    (2) ψp ˝ ψq “ ψq ˝ ψp for all p, q P P .
By a ΛA,P -ring we mean an A-algebra with ΛA,P -structure. (In fact, this definition
of ΛA,P -structure is well-behaved only when B is torsion free as an A-module, but
since all the ΛA,P -rings in this paper have that property, we will use the simple
definition given above. For the general one, see [3].)
   For example, if A is the ring of integers of a number field K and B is the ring of
integers of a subfield L of the strict Hilbert class field of K, then B has a unique
ΛA,P -structure: ψp is the Artin symbol of p in the field extension K Ď L.
   Observe that if p satisfies B bA kppq “ 0, then the lifting condition (1) is vacuous.
In particular, if B is an algebra over K, then any commuting collection of K-
automorphisms of B indexed by the maximal ideals of P is a ΛA,P -structure on B.
At a different extreme, if P consists of one maximal ideal, for example if A is a
local ring, then the commutation condition (2) is vacuous.
   When A “ Z and P “ MQ , Wilkerson and Joyal have shown that a ΛA,P -
structure on a ring without Z-torsion is the same as a λ-ring structure in the sense
of algebraic K-theory [23][15]. For instance, for any abelian group M we have a
natural ΛZ,P -structure on the group ring ZrM s given by ψppq pmq “ mp for m P M
and prime p. In an earlier paper [7], we showed that a ΛZ,P -ring that is reduced
and finite flat over Z is a sub-ΛZ,P -ring of ZrCsn for some finite cyclic group C and
integer n ě 0. The proof uses the explicit description of ray class fields over Q as
cyclotomic fields.
   Over a general number field, class field theory is less explicit, and the general-
izations we present in the present paper are consequently less explicit. However,
we can still give a very similar criterion for a finite étale K-algebra E with ΛA,P -
structure to admit an integral ΛA,P -model, by which we mean a sub-ΛA,P -ring
B Ď E which is finite flat as an A-module such that the induced map K bA B Ñ E
is a bijection. See theorem 1.2 below.
   Let IdP denote the set of non-zero ideals of A divisible only by the primes in P .
It as a monoid under ideal multiplication, the free commutative monoid on the set
P . Let K sep be a separable closure of K, and let GK denote the Galois group of
K sep over K. It is a profinite group. By a GK -set X we mean a finite discrete set
with a continuous GK -action. By Grothendieck’s formulation of Galois theory, a
finite étale K-algebra E is determined by the GK -set S consisting of all K-algebra
homomorphisms E Ñ K sep . Giving a ΛA,P -structure on E then translates to giving
a monoid map IdP Ñ MapGK pS, Sq. By giving IdP the discrete topology, we see
that the category of ΛA,P -rings whose underlying A-algebra is a finite étale K-
algebra is anti-equivalent to the category of finite discrete sets with a continuous
action of the monoid GK ˆ IdP .
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                 3


   Let us first consider the case where A is a complete discrete valuation ring and
P consists of the single maximal ideal p. Then IdP is isomorphic as a monoid to
the monoid of non-negative integers under addition. Let IK Ď GK be the inertia
subgroup. Then IK is normal in GK and GK {IK is the absolute Galois group of
kppq, which contains the Frobenius element F P GK {IK given by x ÞÑ xN ppq . Thus,
F acts on any GK -set on which IK acts trivially.
Theorem 1.1. Suppose that A is a complete discrete valuation ring and that P
consists of the single maximal ideal p. Let E be a finite étale K-algebra with a
ΛA,P -structure, and let S be the set of K-algebra maps from E to K sep . Then K
has an integral ΛA,P -model if and only if the action of GK ˆ IdP on S satisfies the
following two conditions:
     (1) the group IK acts trivially on Sunr “ ně0 pn S;
                                               Ş
     (2) the elements p P IdP and F P GK {IK act in the same way on Sunr .

See section 3 for the proof.
   Next, consider the global case, where A is the ring of integers in a number field.
   In order to express our result, let us first recall
                                                   ś the definition of the ray class
monoid. A cycle of K is a formal product f “ p pnp , where the product ranges
over all primes of K, both finite and infinite, all np are non-negative integers, only
finitely many of which are non-zero, and we have np P t0, ś  1u for real primes p, and
np “ 0 for complex primes p. The finite part of f is ffin “ pă8 pnp , which can be
viewed as an ideal of A. We write ordp pfq “ np .
   For a cycle f, we say that two integral ideals a, b are f-equivalent, and write
a „f b, if the following two conditions are satisfied:
     (1) a and b have the same greatest common divisor d with ffin
     (2) ad´1 and bd´1 represent the same class in the ray class group Clpfd´1 q of
         conductor fd´1 .
This is an equivalence relation, and we write DRP pfq for the quotient IdP {„f .
Because „f is preserved by multiplication of ideals, DRP pfq inherits a unique monoid
structure from IdP . We call it the ray class monoid (or Deligne–Ribet monoid) of
conductor f supported at P . It was introduced in Deligne–Ribet [11] in the case
where P “ MK and every real place divides f. For alternative definitions of f-
equivalence and DRP pfq, see section 4.
   Let us say that P is Chebotarev dense if any element of any ray class group Clpfq
can be represented by an ideal supported at P , or equivalently by infinitely many
such ideals. For example, by Chebotarev’s theorem, any set P consisting of all
but finitely many maximal ideals is Chebotarev dense. Whenever P is Chebotarev
dense, any element of Clpfq can be written as the class of an ideal supported at
P , and hence gives a well-defined element of DRP pfq. This defines a map Clpfq Ñ
DRP pfq, which is in fact injective. Composing with the Artin symbol defines a map
(1.1.1)                      GK ÝÑ Clpfq ÝÑ DRP pfq,
and hence a surjective map
(1.1.2)                        GK ˆ IdP ÝÑ DRP pfq
whose restriction to the first factor is the map (1.1.1) and whose restriction to the
second factor is the canonical quotient map IdP Ñ DRP pfq.
Theorem 1.2. Suppose that K is a number field and that P is Chebotarev dense.
Let E be a finite étale K-algebra with a ΛA,P -structure, and let S be the set of
K-algebra maps from E to K sep . Then E has an integral ΛA,P -model if and only if
there is a cycle f of K such that the action of GK ˆ IdP on S factors (necessarily
uniquely) through the map GK ˆ IdP ÝÑ DRP pfq above.
4                               J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


   It follows that the category of such ΛA,P -rings is anti-equivalent to the category
of finite discrete sets with a continuous action by the profinite monoid limf DRP pfq,
where the inverse limit is taken over all cycles f with respect to the canonical
surjective maps DRpfq Ñ DRpf1 q when f1 | f. When K “ Q, A “ Z, and P “ MQ ,
this limit is the monoid Ẑ˝ of all profinite integers under multiplication. In this
case, the theorem above reduces to the first theorem of our earlier paper [7]. It was
Lenstra who suggested that the ray class monoid could play this role over general
number fields.
   When E admits an integral ΛA,P -model, there must be a maximal one. (See
section 2.) In the example above, Zrxs{pxn ´ 1q is the maximal integral model
of Qrxs{pxn ´ 1q. This is the second theorem in [7]. In general, let us write
RA,P pfq for the maximal integral ΛA,P -model associated to the free DRP pfq-set on
one generator, namely DRP pfq. We call RA,P pfq the ray class algebra of conductor
f—just as Kpfq, the ray class field of conductor f, is the extension of K corresponding
to the free Clpfq-set on one generator. The ray class algebra is an order in a product
of ray class fields:
                                               ź
                           K bA RA,P pfq “            Kpfd´1 q.
                                            d|f,dPIdP

It is typically smaller than the maximal order in the non-Λ sense. For example,
                                                     ź
                       RZ,MQ pn8q “ Zrxs{pxn ´ 1q Ĺ     Zrζd s.
                                                        d|n

   The theorems in [7] for K “ Q, however, give us something more than the
abstract existence theorem above. They give explicit presentations of the ray class
algebras RZ,MQ pn8q, namely Zrxs{pxn ´ 1q. More importantly, the presentations
are all as quotients of a single finitely generated Λ-ring—in this case Zrx˘1 s, or
Zrxs, where each ψp is defined by ψp pxq “ xp . One can view this as a Λ-refinement
of the Kronecker–Weber theorem, telling us that the function algebra Opµn q of
the n-torsion subscheme µn Ă Gm “ Spec Zrx˘1 s is isomorphic as a ΛZ,MQ -ring
to the ray class algebra RZ,MQ pn8q; this is instead of the statement that its set
of Q̄-points, µn pQ̄q, generates the ray class field Qpn8q. This refinement gives us
Frobenius lifts at all primes, even those dividing the conductor, by treating integral
structures with more care. But the ray class algebras will have zero divisors and
be non-normal over the primes dividing the conductor, which some might consider
a drawback. Then again, they are normal in a Λ-ring theoretic sense, by definition.
   It is natural to ask whether something like this holds for number fields K larger
than Q. Do the ray class algebras RA,P pfq have a common origin in the algebraic
geometry of ΛA,P -rings? If so, this would give a systematic way of generating ray
class algebras and hence ray class fields. Or more modestly, is it at least true that
the known explicit class field theories admit a Λ-refinement as above? There is also
a converse question: when does a ΛA,P -structure on an A-scheme X give rise to a
family of abelian extensions, as the ΛZ,MQ -structure on Gm does?
   The converse is the easier direction, and we will consider it first. Let X be a (flat
and separated) A-scheme with a ΛA,P -structure, by which we mean a commuting
family of Frobenius lifts ψp : X Ñ X, for p P P . If we are going to follow the model
of µn Ď Gm and produce abelian extensions of our number field K by finding
finite flat sub-ΛA,P -schemes Z Ď X and applying the theorem above, then by this
theorem, there must exist a cycle f such that the Frobenius operators ψa on Z are
f-periodic in a, meaning that they depend only on the class of a in DRP pfq. So it
is natural to consider the largest such subscheme, the locus Xpfq Ď X where the
operations ψa depend only the class of a in DRP pfq. We call Xpfq the f-periodic
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                   5


locus. It is defined by a large equalizer diagram; so it does indeed exist and is a
closed subscheme of X.
    For example, in the cyclotomic setting with the ΛZ,MQ -scheme X “ Gm as above
and f “ n8, with n ě 1, the f-periodicity condition is ψpm`nq “ ψpmq for all m ě 1.
In other words, it is that the operators ψpmq are periodic in m with period dividing
n. It follows that the f-periodic locus is just the n-torsion locus µn . In general,
while the f-periodic locus is similar in spirit to the f-torsion locus when X is a group,
they can be different: for example if X is still Gm but f is trivial at 8, so f “ pnq,
then the periodic locus must also be invariant under the involution x ÞÑ x˘1 and
is hence just µ2 if n is even, or µ1 if n is odd.
    But the definition of Xpfq does not even require X to be a group. Thus the
group scheme structure in the traditional frameworks for explicit class field theory
is replaced by a Λ-structure in ours. This will allow us some flexibility that is not
available when working with group schemes. For example, we can divide out a CM
elliptic curve, say, by its automorphism group. Although the group structure is lost,
the Λ-structure is retained and hence we can still speak of the periodic locus on the
quotient. Note that whereas in the group-scheme setting, the abelian nature of the
Galois theory comes from the torsion locus being of rank 1 over some commutative
ring of complex multiplications and then from the commutativity of the general
linear group GL1 , in our setting, it comes from the assumption that the Frobenius
lifts ψp commute with each other and then from Chebotarev’s theorem.
    We can now state the answer to the converse question:

Theorem 1.3. Let X be a ΛA,P -scheme of finite type over A, as above, and assume
P is Chebotarev dense. Then possibly after inverting some primes, Xpfq is an affine
ΛA,P -scheme which is reduced and finite flat over A.

   The idea of the proof is that for primes p ∤ f, the endomorphism ψp is an au-
tomorphism of finite order because the class rps P DRP pfq is invertible and hence
has finite order; therefore the Frobenius endomorphism of the fiber of X over p
is an automorphism of finite order, and so the fiber is finite and geometrically re-
duced. Then apply the semicontinuity theorems of scheme theory. For details, see
theorem 8.4.
   It then follows from theorem 1.2 that OpXpfqK q, the function algebra of the
generic fiber of Xpfq, is a finite product of abelian extensions of K of conductor
dividing f. Thus any ΛA,P -scheme X of finite type (still flat and separated) gives
rise to a uniform geometric way of constructing abelian extensions indexed by cycles
f. It will not always produce arbitrarily large abelian extensions—for example, the
Chebyshev line below will only produce the ray class fields over Q with trivial
conductor at infinity, namely Qpζn ` ζn´1 q.
   We can now state some precise versions of our original question of whether the
ray class algebras have a common origin in Λ-algebraic geometry. It is cleaner to
restrict to cycles f of a fixed type away from P , and in particular of a fixed type at
infinity. So fix a cycle r supported away from P , and let ZpP, rq denote the set of
cycles f which agree with r away from the primes in P . We will refer to the triple
pA, P, rq as the context.
  (Q1) Does there exist a ΛA,P -scheme X of finite type such that for all f P ZpP, rq,
       the direct factors of the étale K-algebra OpXpfqK q generate the ray class
       field Kpfq?
   The Kronecker–Weber theorem states that the answer is positive in the cyclo-
tomic context pZ, MQ , 8q, with X being Gm with the usual ΛZ,MQ -structure de-
fined above. We will show it is true in two other classical contexts of explicit
6                               J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


class field theory, namely the real-cyclotomic context pZ, MQ , p1qq and the context
pOK , MK , p1qq where K is an imaginary quadratic field.
    In fact, we will show a stronger Λ-refinement holds. The strongest question one
might ask is the following:
   (Q2) Does there exist a ΛA,P -scheme X of finite type such that for all f P ZpP, rq,
          the function algebra OpXpfqq of the periodic locus is isomorphic to the ray
          class algebra RA,P pfq?
    As mentioned above, the answer is positive in the cyclotomic context with X “
Gm . But it appears to be slightly too much to ask for in general. For instance,
consider the real-cyclotomic context pZ, MQ , p1qq, and let X “ Gm {px ÞÑ x´1 q –
A1Z . Then the ΛZ,MQ -structure on Gm descends to one on X. The operations ψppq
are given by Chebyshev polynomials ψppq pyq P Zrys determined by ψppq px ` x´1 q “
xp ` x´p . Then for any n ě 1, the periodic locus Xpnq does indeed generate the
real ray class fields,
                              QpXpnqpQ̄qq “ Qpζn ` ζn´1 q,
but OpXpnqq does not generally agree with the full ray class algebra RZ,P pnq. It
is however only of index 2 in it, once n is even, and this error even disappears
in the limit as n grows. So in the real-cyclotomic context, the answer to (Q2) is
as about as close to being positive without being so (at least for the given X!).
This discrepancy is no doubt due to the nontrivial isotropy groups of the points
˘1 P Gm under the involution x ÞÑ x´1 , and it may very well disappear in a proper
stack-theoretic treatment.
    But if we stay in the world of schemes, we need to control it. So given a finite
reduced ΛA,P -ring B, let B̃ denote the maximal integral ΛA,P -model in K bA B.
It is the Λ-analogue of the integral closure of B.
   (Q3) Does there exist a ΛA,P -scheme X of finite type such that for all f P ZpP, rq,
            (i) the function algebra OpXpfqq is of finite index in OpXpfqq„ ,
           (ii) the morphism of pro-rings
                       ´         ¯           ´            ¯
                         OpXpfqq         ÝÑ OpXpfqq„
                                fPZpP,rq                  fPZpP,rq

              is an isomorphism, and
        (iii) OpXpfqq„ is isomorphic to RA pfq as a ΛA,P -ring?
Theorem 1.4. The answer to (Q3) is positive in the following contexts pA, P, rq
with the ΛA,P -schemes X:
    (1) pZ, MQ , 8q and X “ Gm{Z with the ΛZ,MQ -structure above
    (2) pZ, MQ , p1qq and X “ A1Z with the Chebyshev ΛZ,MQ -structure
    (3) pOK , MK , p1qq, where K is imaginary quadratic with Hilbert class field H,
        and X is P1OH , viewed as a scheme over OK , with the Lattès ΛOK ,MK -
        structure defined in (11.2).
   The Λ-scheme P1OH in the imaginary quadratic context plays the role of the tar-
get of the Weber functions E Ñ E{AutpEq – P1C in the traditional treatments of
explicit class field theory of imaginary quadratic fields. There are, however, a num-
ber of subtleties in constructing this Λ-structure. For instance, CM elliptic curves
are only defined over H and not K, there can be more than one of them, but it
might be that none of them has good reduction everywhere. These problems were
completely clarified in Gurney’s thesis [14]. He also gave an account of class field
theory for imaginary quadratic fields from the point of view of the Λ-structure on
P1OH , but he stopped at considering the field extensions generated by the preimages
ψf´1 p8q. In either approach, the package of elliptic curves with complex multipli-
cation and their Weber functions is replaced by the single ΛOK ,MK -scheme P1OH .
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                  7


We emphasize that P1OH is not so interesting from a cohomological or motivic point
of view—there are no interesting Galois representations in the cohomology. All the
richness is in the Λ-structure.
    It would be interesting to know if something similar holds for other number
fields, starting with CM fields. One virtue of the questions above is that they allow
for negative answers, which would also be interesting. In the final section, we will
raise some further questions in this direction.
   It is a pleasure to thank Lance Gurney and Hendrik Lenstra for several helpful
discussions.

Part 1. Finite Λ-rings and class field theory
                              2. Maximal Λ-orders
2.1. Maximal Λ-orders. Let A1 be a sub-A-algebra of K, and let E be a finite
K-algebra with ΛA,P -structure. A sub-A1 -algebra B Ď E with a ΛA,P -structure is
said to be a ΛA,P -order (over A1 ) if it is finite over A1 . We say it is maximal (in
E) if it contains all others. Maximal ΛA,P -orders always exist, by an elementary
argument ([7], prop. 1.1), since maximal orders in the ordinary sense exist and since
A1 is noetherian.
   We will say a finite flat A1 -algebra B with a ΛA,P -structure is normal (or ΛA,P -
normal over A1 ) if it is maximal in K bA1 B, in the sense above.
   We will need the following basic facts:
Proposition 2.2. Let B be a finite flat A1 -algebra with ΛA,P -structure.
   (1) B is ΛA,P -normal over A1 if OKp bA1 B is ΛOKp ,p -normal over OKp for all
       maximal ideals p of A1 .
   (2) If B is ΛA,P -normal over A1 , and G is a group acting on B by ΛA,P -
       automorphisms, then the invariant subring B G is ΛA,P -normal over A1 .
   (3) If B is a product B1 ˆ B2 of ΛA,P -rings, then B is ΛA,P -normal over A1 if
       and only if B1 and B2 are.
Proof. (1): Let C Ď K bA1 B be a ΛA,P -order over A1 containing B. Then for any
maximal ideal p Ă A1 , the base change OKp bA1 C is a ΛOKp ,p -order over OKp .
Therefore it agrees with OKp bA1 B. Since this holds for all maximal ideals p Ă A1 ,
the ring C agrees with B. Therefore B is maximal.
   (2): Let C Ď K bA1 B G be a ΛA,P -order over A1 containing B G . Then C is
contained in K bA1 B and hence, by the maximality of B, is contained in B. But
since C is contained in K bA1 B G , it is also G-invariant. Therefore we have C Ď B G .
   (3): Let C Ď K bA1 pB1 ˆ B2 q be a ΛA,P -order over A1 containing B1 ˆ B2 . Put
Ci “ C bB1 ˆB2 Bi , for i “ 1, 2. Then each Ci is a ΛA,P -order over A1 in K bA1 Bi .
By the maximality of Bi , we have Ci “ Bi . Therefore we have
                              C “ C1 ˆ C2 “ B1 ˆ B2 .
Thus B1 ˆ B2 is maximal.                                                             

                                3. The local case
   In this section, A will be a complete discrete valuation ring with maximal ideal
p, and P will be the singleton set tpu. So IdP is the multiplicative monoid of all
nonzero ideals of A. Write k “ kppq and ΛA,p “ ΛA,P .
Proposition 3.1. Let B be a finite étale A-algebra. Then B has a unique ΛA,p -
structure, and the induced action of GK ˆ IdP on S “ HomK -alg pB bA K, K sep q has
the property that the inertia group IK acts trivially and that the element p P IdP
and the Frobenius element F P GK {IK act on S in the same way.
8                                        J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


Proof. Because B is étale, k bA B is a product of finite fields. Since B is complete
in its p-adic topology, idempotents of B{pB lift to B, so that B is a finite product
of rings of integers in finite unramified extensions of K. Therefore the inertia group
IK Ď GK acts trivially on S “ HomA-alg pB, K sep q. Every finite unramified field
extension L of K is Galois with an abelian Galois group, and its rings of integers
has a unique Frobenius lift. It follows that when B is unramified over A, it has a
unique ΛA,p -structure.                                                              

3.2. Structure of finite étale K-algebras with ΛA,p -structure. Let E be a finite
étale K-algebra with a ΛA,p -structure, and write
                                       S “ HomK -alg pE, K sep q.
                       n
           Ş
Put S0 “       ně0 p       S and for i “ 1, 2, . . ., let
                               Si “ ts P S : s R Si´1 and ps P Si´1 u.
Then each Si is a sub-GK -set of S. Since S is finite, there exists an n ě 0 such
that Sn`1 “ ∅. Then we have the decomposition
                                         S “ S0 > S1 > ¨ ¨ ¨ > Sn .
Let Ei “ MapGK pSi , K sep q be the corresponding finite étale K-algebra for each i.
Then the maps Sn Ñ ¨ ¨ ¨ Ñ S1 Ñ S0 ý given by multiplication by p give rise to a
diagram of K-algebras
                                              1 f  2    f   n     f
                                     f0 ü E0 ÝÑE1 ÝÑ ¨ ¨ ¨ ÝÑEn

Since S “ S0 > S1 > ¨ ¨ ¨ > Sn is a decomposition of G as a GK -set, we have a corre-
sponding product decomposition of the finite étale K-algebras E “ E0 ˆ E1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ
En . In terms of this decomposition, ψp is given by
(3.2.3)            ψp pe0 , e1 , . . . , en q “ pf0 pe0 q, f1 pe0 q, . . . , fn pen´1 qq.
Since S0 is closed under multiplication by p, the quotient ring E0 of E is a quotient
ΛA,p -ring of E, with Frobenius lift f0 .
    We will now construct a splitting of this quotient map E Ñ E0 in the category
of ΛA,p -rings. Note that we have pk S “ S0 for sufficiently large k; so we have
pS0 “ S0 and hence p act as a bijection on S0 . Thus, f0 is an automorphism of
E0 . For s P Si we have pi s P S0 . Again since p acts bijectively on S0 , we can
define a map S ÝÑ S0 by sending s P Si to the unique element s1 of S0 such that
pi s1 “ pi s. This map commutes with the GK ˆ IdP -action, and it is a retraction of
the inclusion S0 Ñ S. This induces our desired splitting E0 Ñ E. In other words,
E0 is not only a quotient ΛA,p -ring of E, but also a sub-ΛA,p -ring:
            j : E0 ÝÑ E
                  e0 ÞÝÑpe0 , f1 f0´1 e0 , f2 f1 f0´2 e0 , . . . , fn´1 ¨ ¨ ¨ f1 f0´n`1 e0 q.

3.3. Proof of theorem 1.1. Suppose that E has an integral ΛA,p -model B, that is,
     (i) B is finitely generated as an A-module and has rank dimK pEq,
    (ii) ψp pBq Ď B,
   (iii) ψp bA k is the Frobenius map x ÞÑ xN ppq on B bA k.
   Let B0 denote the image of B under the quotient map E Ñ E0 (in the notation of
3.2). Then B0 is an integral ΛA,p -model of E0 . Since f0 is an automorphism of E0 ,
the ring B0 and its subring f0 pB0 q have the same discriminant. Thus, f0 pB0 q “ B0
and hence f0 is an automorphism of B0 . This implies that the map x ÞÑ xN ppq on
B0 bA k is an automorphism, and so B0 is étale over A. Conditions (1) and (2) of
theorem 1.1 now follow by proposition 3.1.
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                   9


   For the converse, suppose that conditions (1) and (2) hold. We will produce an
integral ΛA,p -model of E “ E0 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ En . Let Ri be the integral closure of A in
Ei . Since IK acts trivially on Sunr “ S0 , the A-algebra R0 is finite étale and hence
has a unique ΛA,p -structure by proposition 3.1. Our integral model B Ď E will be
of the form
(3.3.4)                   B “ jpR0 q ‘ p0 ˆ a1 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˆ an q,
where each ai is an ideal in Ri and j is the map defined in 3.2. Observe that
any B of this form is a subring of E. For it to be a sub-ΛA,p -ring, we need to
have ψp paq ” aN ppq mod pB for all a P B. Since both sides of this congruence are
additive in a, it is enough to consider elements a in each of the summands in (3.3.4).
It holds for the summand jpR0 q because j is a ΛA,p -morphism. So by (3.2.3), a
                                                                             N ppq
sufficient condition for B to be a sub-ΛA,p -ring is fi pai´1 q Ď pai and ai       Ď pai
for i “ 1, . . . , n, where we take a0 “ 0. This holds if, for instance, ai “ pn´i`1 Ri .
So for this choice, B is an integral ΛA,p -model of E.                                
3.4. Remark. Note that the integral model produced in the proof above is not
always the maximal one. For instance, if Cn denotes a cyclic group of order n, then
on the group algebra Q2 rC4 s with its usual ΛZ2 ,2 -structure, the proof produces a
strict subring of Z2 rC4 s and hence cannot be not maximal. (In fact, Z2 rC4 s is the
maximal integral model, as is shown in [7]).
   It can also happen that, for group algebras, the integral model supplied by the
proof is strictly larger than the integral group algebra. An example is Q2 rC2 ˆ C2 s.
3.5. Remark. It is possible to express theorem 1.1 in a more Galois-theoretic way,
similar to the statement of theorem 1.2. We can define an inverse system of finite
quotients GN,n of the monoid GK ˆ IdP with the property that E has an integral
ΛA,p -model if and only if the action of GK ˆ IdP on S factors through some GN,n .
    The quotients GN,n are defined as follows. Let N be an open normal subgroup of
GK , and let n be an integer ě 0. Define a relation on GK ˆ IdP by pg, pa q „ ph, pb q
if either or both of the following conditions hold:
     (1) a “ b and g ” h mod N
     (2) a, b ě n and gF a ” hF b mod N IK .
This is easily seen to be an equivalence relation which is stable under the monoid
operation. We then define GN,n to be the quotient monoid. Observe that we have
a decomposition of GK -sets:
(3.5.5)              GN,n “ G K {N > ¨ ¨ ¨ > GK {N > GK {N IK .
                            loooooooooooomoooooooooooon
                                      n times

  For N 1 Ď N and n1 ě n, we have evident transition maps GN 1 ,n1 Ñ GN,n . If we
consider the inverse limit
                                Ĝ “ lim GN,n ,
                                          N,n
then the re-expression of theorem 1.1 is that E has an integral ΛA,p -model if and
only if the action of GK ˆ IdP on S factors (necessarily uniquely) through a con-
tinuous action of Ĝ. One might call Ĝ the ΛA,p -algebraic fundamental monoid of
Spec OK with ramification allowed along Spec k.
3.6. Remark. In the global case considered in the rest of this paper, we will see
that only abelian field extensions arise from integral Λ-models. But in the local
case, we can get nonabelian extensions. In fact, we can get arbitrary extensions.
Indeed, any given extension L of K is a direct factor of the K-algebra Lunr ˆ L,
which has a ΛA,p -structure admitting an integral model. For instance, one can take
ψp pe0 , e1 q “ pF pe0 q, e0 q.
10                                 J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


                              4. The ray class monoid
     Fix the following notation:
             K “ a finite extension of Q
            OK “ the ring of integers in K
            MK “ the set of maximal ideals of OK
              A “ a Dedekind domain whose fraction field is K
              P “ a set of maximal ideals of A
            IdP “ the monoid of nonzero ideals of A supported at P
               f “ a cycle (or modulus) on K
              fP “ the part of f supported at P
              fP “ the part of f supported away from P
             ffin “ the part of f supported at the finite primes
             f8 “ the part of f supported at the real places
          IdP pfq “ the submonoid of IdP of ideals prime to ffin
           Clpfq “ the ray class group of K of conductor f
          ClP pfq “ the image of the canonical map IdP pfq Ñ Clpfq
             R˝ “ R viewed as a monoid under multiplication, for any ring R
Observe that, up to canonical isomorphism, the constructions above depend only
on the places of K corresponding to P , and so they depend on A only in that
these places must come from maximal ideals of A. Therefore we can take A “ OK
without changing anything above.

4.1. Structure of the ray class monoid. There is a bijection
                                              „
                            ž
(4.1.6)                          ClP pfd´1 q ÝÑ DRP pfq,
                             dPIdP ,d|f

sending an ideal class ras P ClP pfd´1 q in the summand of index d to the class
rdas P DRP pfq. Thus we have
                           ž
(4.1.7)                         rdsClP pfd´1 q “ DRP pfq.
                            dPIdP ,d|f

The multiplication law on DRP pfq is given in terms of the left-hand side by the
formula
(4.1.8)                         rdsras ¨ rd1 sra1 s “ rd2 sra2 s,
where d2 “ gcdpdd1 , fq and a2 satisfies d2 a2 “ dad1 a1 . It follows, for example, that
the submonoid DRP pfq˚ Ď DRP pfq of invertible elements agrees with the part of
the ray class group supported at P :
                                    DRP pfq˚ “ ClP pfq.
   When P is Chebotarev dense, we have ClP pfq “ Clpfq, and so the invertible part
of DRP pfq is independent of P . Observe however that this is not the case for the
noninvertible part. For example, if K “ Q and f “ pnq8, then we have
(4.1.9)                    DRP pfq “ pZ{nP Zq˝ ˆ pZ{nP Zq˚ ,
where nP is the factor of n supported at P and nP is that supported away from P .
The invertible part is pZ{nP Zq˚ ˆ pZ{nP Zq˚ “ pZ{nZq˚ , which does not depend
on P , but the non-invertible part does.
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS               11


4.2. Change of conductor. Suppose f | f1 . Then we have the implication
                                 b „f1 c ñ b „f c.
which induces a monoid map
(4.2.10)                        DRP pf1 q Ñ DRP pfq,
which we call the canonical map.
  There is also a map in the other direction. Write f1 “ fa. Then by the equivalence
                                b „f c ô ab „af ac,
there is a well-defined injective map
(4.2.11)                DRP pfq ÝÑ DRP pf1 q,   rbs ÞÑ rabs.
It is not a monoid map, but it is an equivariant map of DRP pf1 q-sets. The com-
position with the canonical projection DRP pf1 q Ñ DRP pfq on either the left or the
right, is given by multiplication by the class of a.

   We conclude this section with two more descriptions of f-equivalence and the ray
class monoid, although they only have small parts in this paper. The first is the
one that appears in Deligne–Ribet [11], and a form of the second was pointed out
to us by Bora Yalkinoglu.
Proposition 4.3. Two ideals a, b of OK are f-equivalent if and only if a “ xb for
some element x P 1 ` ffin b´1 which is positive at all real places dividing f.
Proof. Let d “ gcdpf, bq. By definition, we have a „f b if and only if there exists
an element x P K ˚ satisfying the following:
     (1) ad´1 “ xbd´1
     (2) x ” 1 mod pnp , where np “ ordp pfd´1 q, whenever np ě 1
     (3) x is positive at all real places dividing fd´1 .
Observe that (1) is equivalent to a “ xb and that (3) is equivalent to the positivity
condition in the statement of the proposition. It is therefore enough to show that,
under (1), condition (2) is equivalent to x P 1 ` ffin b´1 , or equivalently to the
condition that that for all p, we have x ” 1 mod pmp , where mp “ ordp pfb´1 q. So
fix a prime p. In the case ordp pfq ě ordp pbq, we have np “ mp and so this condition
is indeed equivalent to (2).
    Now consider the remaining case ordp pfq ă ordp pbq. Then we have np “ 0 and
mp ă 0. Because np “ 0, condition (2) is vacuous. Therefore it is enough to
show that x ” 1 mod pmp necessarily holds. Since gcdpf, bq “ gcdpf, aq, we have
ordp pfq ă ordp paq and hence
    ordp px ´ 1q ě mintordp pxq, 0u “ mintordp pab´1 q, 0u ě mintmp , 0u “ mp .
                                                                                   
Proposition 4.4. Assume that P is Chebotarev dense. Then there is an isomor-
phism
                                                  „
(4.4.12)              pOK {fP q˝ ‘pOK {fP q˚ Clpfq ÝÑ DRP pfq,
which is given by the canonical inclusion Clpfq Ñ DRP pfq on the second factor
and which on the first factor sends the residue class of any element x P OK with
pxq P IdP to the class rpxqs P DRP pfq.
   The notation A‘G B above refers to the push out in the category of commutative
monoids, which when G is a group is the quotient of A ‘ B “ A ˆ B by the action
of G given by g ¨ pa, bq “ pga, g ´1 bq.
12                                    J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


Proof. First observe that this morphism is well defined. Indeed, any element x P
pOK {fP q˚ is the image of an element x̃ P OK relatively prime to fP , and its class
rpx̃qs in DRP pfq is indeed the image of its class in the ray class group Clpfq.
    The fact that this morphism is an isomorphism is a consequence of the following
equalities, which will be justified below, and where d runs over IdP with d | f:
                                 ž                   ž
(4.4.13)              DRP pfq “     rdsClP pfd´1 q “   rdsClpfd´1 q
                                      d                     d
Let us simplify the right-hand side further and show
(4.4.14)                 rdsClpfd´1 q “ Clpfq{p1 ` ffin d´1 {ffin q.
We use the adèlic description of ray class groups: Clpmq “ A˚K {K ˚ Um . Then we
have the exact sequence
                         Ufd´1 {Uf ÝÑ Clpfq ÝÑ Clpfd´1 q ÝÑ 1.
Since the archimedean parts of fd´1 and f agree, we have
                      Ufd´1 {Uf “ Uffin d´1 {Uffin “ 1 ` ffin d´1 {ffin .
Equation (4.4.14) follows.
  Combining this with (4.4.13), we have
                      ž
          DRP pfq “     rdsClpfq{p1 ` ffin d´1 {ffin q
                         d
                      ž
                    “  rdspOK {ffin d´1 q˚ ‘pOK {ffin q˚ Clpfq
                         d
                      ´ž                   ¯
                    “   rdspOK {ffin d´1 q˚ ‘pOK {ffin q˚ Clpfq
                             d
                    “ pOK {fP q˝ ˆ pOK {fP q˚ ‘pOK {ffin q˚ Clpfq
                     `                       ˘

                    “ pOK {fP q˝ ˆ pOK {fP q˚ ‘pOK {fP q˚ ˆpOK {fP q˚ Clpfq
                     `                       ˘

                    “ pOK {fP q˝ ‘pOK {fP q˚ Clpfq.
                                                                                   
4.5. Examples. If K has class number 1 and P is still Chebotarev dense, then we
have
(4.5.15)               DRP pfq “ pOK {fP q˝ ‘O ˚            pOK {fP    ˚
                                                                  fin q ,
                                                     K,f8

         ˚                           ˚
where OK,f  8
              is the subgroup of OK     consisting of units which are positive at all
places dividing f8 . At a different extreme, if K is arbitrary but P “ MK , then in
the limit we have
                                                 ˝
(4.5.16)                         lim DRP pfq “ ÔK ‘Ô ˚ Gab
                                                          K.
                                  f                      K


If K has class number 1 and P “ MK , then we have
                                 DRP pfq “ pOK {ffin q˝ {OK,f
                                                          ˚
                                                              8
                                                                .

                                   5. Global arguments
   The purpose of this section is to prove theorem 1.2 from the introduction. It
will follow immediately from proposition 5.2 and theorem 5.5 below.
   We continue with the notation of the previous section. Also fix the following
notation:
           E “ a finite étale K-algebra with a ΛA,P -structure
           S “ HomK pE, K sep q, with its continuous action of GK ˆ IdP .
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                 13


Define r P IdP by setting
(5.0.17)                 ordp prq “ infti ě 0 : pi`1 S “ pi Su
for each prime p P P . This is well defined because pS “ S whenever p is unramified
in B, by proposition 3.1.
Lemma 5.1. Assume that E has an integral ΛA,P -model B. Let d be an ideal in
IdP , and put b “ gcdpd, rq. Then dS equals bS, and this GK -set is unramified at
all primes dividing db´1 .
Proof. Observe that for any prime p | db´1 , we have pbS “ bS. Indeed, we have
ordp pbq “ ordp prq and hence p1`ordp pbq S “ pordp pbq S, by the definition of r. Then
pbS “ bS follows.
    This implies by induction that dS “ bS. It also implies that for each prime
p | db´1 , the action of p on bS “ dS is bijective. Therefore by theorem 1.1(1), this
GK -set is unramified at all primes p | db´1 .                                       
Proposition 5.2. If E has an integral ΛA,P -model and P is Chebotarev dense,
then the action of GK on S factors through the abelianization of GK .
Proof. Let B be an integral ΛA,P -model of E. For each prime p P P we consider
the completion Ap , and its fraction field Kp . Then we obtain an ΛAp ,p -structure
on the finite étale Kp -algebra Ep “ E bK Kp , and then B bA Ap is an integral
ΛAp ,p -model of Ep . Fixing an embedding K sep Ñ Kpsep for each p we can view
Gp as a subgroup of GK . The finite étale Kp -algebra Ep then corresponds to the
Gp -set that one gets by restricting the action of GK on S to Gp .
   Now let Ḡ be the image of the action map GK Ñ MappS, Sq. Because P is
Chebotarev dense, for each g P Ḡ there is a prime p “ pg in P such that
    (1) B is unramified at p,
    (2) the image of Fp P Gp {Ip under the induced map Gp {Ip Ñ Ḡ is g.
By proposition 3.1, the action of g on S is the same as the action of pg on S. But
by the definition of ΛA,P -structure, the pg commute with each other. Therefore Ḡ
is abelian.                                                                      
5.3. Conductors. By class field theory, any continuous action of the abelianization
of GK on a finite discrete set T factors, by the Artin map, through the ray class
group ClpcpT qq for a minimal cycle cpT q on K, which we call the conductor of T .
Lemma 5.4. Assume that E has an integral ΛA,P -model B and that the action of
GK on S factors through its abelianization. Let f be a cycle on K, and let r be as
in (5.0.17). Then following are equivalent:
    (1) the action of GK ˆ IdP on S factors through an action of DRP pfq,
    (2) r divides f, and for each ideal d | f we have cpdSq | fd´1 ,
                                                                ´1
    (3) r divides f, and for each ideal d | `r we have
                                                    ˘ cpdSq | fd ,
    (4) the least common multiple lcmd|r d cpdSq divides f.
Proof. (1)ñ(2): To show r | f, we will show that for all p P P , we have pn S Ď
pn`1 S, where n “ ordp pfq. Using the decomposition (4.1.7), we see rpsn`1 DRP pfq “
rpsn DRP pfq and hence rpsn “ rpsn`1 x for some x P DRP pfq. Then because the
action of IdP is assumed to factor through DRP pfq, we have pn S “ pn`1 xS Ď
pn`1 S.
   Second, the condition cpdSq | fd´1 of (2) is equivalent to the condition that the
action of GK on dS factors through the Artin map GK Ñ Clpfd´1 q. But this holds
by the assumption (1) and the decomposition (4.1.7).
   (2)ñ(1): Consider an element pσ, aq P GK ˆ IdP . We will show its action
on S depends only on its class in DRP pfq. First observe that by the assumption
14                              J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


cpdSq | fd´1 , taken when d “ p1q, we have cpSq | f. This implies that the action of
GK factors through the Artin map GK Ñ Clpfq, and so it is enough to show that
the action of a depends only on its class ras P DRP pfq. Now put d “ gcdpa, fq and
a1 “ ad´1 . Then we have a1 P IdP pfq. Therefore, because of (4.1.7), it is enough to
show that the action of a1 P IdP pfq on dS depends only on its class ra1 s P ClP pfd´1 q.
In particular, it is enough to show
(5.4.18)                             a1 ds “ Fa1 ds,
for all s P S, where Fa1 P GK is an element mapping to ra1 s under the Artin map
GK Ñ Clpfq. To do this, it is enough to consider the case where a1 is a prime
p P IdP pfq. Now by our assumption r | f, we have p ∤ r and hence p acts bijectively
on S. Therefore by theorem 1.1, we have
                                       ps “ Fp s,
for all s P S. This implies (5.4.18) and hence (1).
   (2) ô (3): The implication (2) ñ (3) is clear. So consider the other direction.
Given an ideal d | f, let b denote gcdpd, rq. Then by lemma 5.1, we have equivalences
           cpdSq | fd´1 ô cpbSq | fd´1 ô cpbSq | fd´1 db´1 ô cpbSq | fb´1 .
Therefore since b is a divisor of r, the condition cpdSq | fd´1 holds for all d | f if it
holds for all d | r.
   (3) ô (4): Clear.                                                                   

Theorem 5.5. Let f be a cycle on K. Then the action of GK ˆ IdP on S factors
(necessarily uniquely) through the map GK ˆ IdP ÝÑ DRP pfq of (1.1.2) if and only
if the following hold:
     (1) the action
               `    of G
                       ˘ K on S factors through its abelianization,
     (2) lcmd|r d cpdSq divides f,
     (3) E has an integral ΛA,P -model.
If P is Chebotarev dense, then condition (1) can be removed.
Proof. If (1)–(3) hold, then by lemma 5.4, the action of GK ˆ IdP on S factors
through DRP pfq; and if P is Chebotarev dense, then (1) can be removed because,
by proposition 5.2, it follows from (3).
   Let us now consider the converse direction. Suppose that the GK ˆ IdP -action
on S factors through DRP pfq. Then (1) holds because DRP pfq is commutative.
Further, (3) implies (2) by lemma 5.4. Therefore it is enough to show (3).
   For each p P P , let Bp denote the maximal sub-ΛAp ,p -ring of E bK Kp which is
finite over Ap . As mentioned in 3.4, it always exists. We will show that Bp bAp Kp
agrees with Ep . To do this, it is enough to show that E bK Kp has an integral
ΛAp ,p -model. So write f “ pn f1 with n “ ordp pfq. Then rpk s P rpn sClpf1 q Ď DRpfq
for all k ě n. This implies, by say (4.1.8), that the action of p on i pi S “ pn S is
                                                                     Ş
given by the Artin symbol of rps P Clpf1 q, which by our local result, theorem 1.1,
guarantees existence of an integral ΛAp ,p -model.
   Now let R denote the integral closure of A in E, and let B denote the set of
elements a P R such that the image of a in E bK Kp lies in Bp for all p P P . We
will show that B is what we seek, an integral ΛA,P -model for E.
   For all p ∤ f, we are in the unramified case, and so Bp is R bA Op , by proposition
3.1. It follows that B is of finite index in R. Therefore, since R is finite and flat
over A and we have E “ R bA K, the same hold for B. Further, B is closed
under all ψq with q P P . Indeed it is enough to show ψq pBp q Ď Bp for all p, q P
P ; and this holds because is a ψq pBp q sub-ΛAp ,p -ring of Ep which is finite over
Ap , and so it is contained in the maximal one Bp . Finally, for each p P P , the
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                    15


induced endomorphism ψp of B is a Frobenius lift, because B bA Op is a ΛAp ,p -
ring. Therefore B is an integral ΛA,P -model for E. This establishes (3) and, hence,
(1) and (2) as explained above.                                                   

Corollary 5.6. If P is Chebotarev dense, there is a contravariant equivalence be-
tween the category of finite étale ΛA,P -rings over K which admit an integral model
and the category of finite discrete sets with a continuous action of the profinite
monoid limf DRP pfq.



Part 2. Periodic loci and explicit class field theory
                                     6. Λ-schemes
   Below X will denote a flat A-scheme.

6.1. Λ-schemes. Let p be a maximal ideal of A. As in the affine case, the fiber
X ˆSpec A Spec kppq has a natural kppq-scheme endomorphism Fp which is the iden-
tity map on the underlying topological space and such that for each affine open
subscheme Spec B, the induced the endomorphism of B is the affine Frobenius map
x ÞÑ xN ppq .
    Let EndA pXq denote the monoid of A-scheme endomorphisms of X. An endo-
morphism ψ P EndA pXq is said to be a Frobenius lift at p if the induced endomor-
phism on the fiber X ˆSpec A Spec kppq agrees with Fp . A ΛA,P -structure on a flat
A-scheme X is defined to be a set map P Ñ EndA pXq, denoted p ÞÑ ψp such that
ψp is a Frobenius lift at p for each p P P and such that ψp ˝ ψq “ ψq ˝ ψp for all
p, q P P . We will call an A-scheme with ΛA,P -structure a ΛA,P -scheme. (When X
is not flat over A, this definition still makes sense; but as in the affine case, it is not
well behaved. In general, one should define it to be an action of the Witt vector
            ˚
monad WA,P      as in the introduction to [4]. We will only consider Λ-structures on
flat schemes in this paper; so the simplified definition above is good enough here.)
    For any ideal a P IdP with prime factorization a “ p1 ¨ ¨ ¨ pn , let ψa denote the
composition ψp1 ˝ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˝ ψpn . It is independent of the order of the factors because
the operators ψp commute with each other.
    A morphism X Ñ Y of ΛA,P -schemes is a morphism f : X Ñ Y of A-schemes
such that f ˝ ψp “ ψp ˝ f , for all p P P . In this way, ΛA,P -schemes form a category.

6.2. Examples. The multiplicative group X “ Gm over A has a ΛA,P -structure
given by ψp pxq “ xN ppq . This extends uniquely to ΛA,P -structures on A1 and P1 .
More generally, projective n-space Pn has a ΛA,P -structure where ψp raises the
homogeneous coordinates to the N ppq power.
   Any product of ΛA,P -schemes is again a ΛA,P -scheme, where the ψ-operators act
componentwise. In a similar way, coproducts of ΛA,P -schemes are ΛA,P -schemes.


                               7. Periodic Λ-schemes
   Let f be a cycle on K.

7.1. Periodic Λ-schemes. We will say that a ΛA,P -scheme X is f-periodic if for
all f-equivalent ideals a, b P IdP , the two maps ψa , ψb : X Ñ X are equal—in other
words, the monoid map IdP Ñ EndA pXq factors through DRP pfq.
16                              J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


7.2. Examples. Suppose that A “ Z, P “ MQ , and f “ pnq8 with n positive.
Then f-periodicity means that ψpaq “ ψpa`nq for all integers a ě 1. In other words,
the sequence of Frobenius lifts ψpaq is periodic in a ě 1 with period dividing n,
which is the reason for the name. Representation rings of finite groups, with their
usual λ-ring structure in algebraic K-theory, are periodic. In fact, periodicity was
first introduced in this context by Davydov [10].
    On the other hand, when A is general but f is p1q, then f-periodicity means that
ψa depends only on the class of a in the class group Clp1q. If f is instead the product
of all real places, then it means that ψa depends only on the class of a in the narrow
class group Clpfq. In particular, if either of these class groups is trivial, then every
ψa is the identity map, and so any (flat) A-scheme has at most one ΛA,P -structure
with that type of periodicity.
    If we are in the intersection of the two cases above, a p1q-periodic ΛZ,P -ring is
just a λ-ring in which all the Adams operations are the identity. Elliott [12] has
proved that this is equivalent to being a binomial ring, a notion which dates back
to Berthelot’s exposé in SGA6 [1], p. 323.
Proposition 7.3. Let X be a separated flat f-periodic ΛA,P -scheme of finite type.
   (1) If P is infinite, then X is affine, reduced, and quasi-finite over A, with étale
       generic fiber XK .
   (2) If P is Chebotarev dense, then the generic fiber’s function algebra OpXK q
       is a product of subextensions of the ray class field Kpfq.
Proof. (1): Let us first show that X is reduced and quasi-finite over A. By period-
icity, for every p P P satisfying p ∤ f, the Frobenius lift ψp on X is an automorphism
of finite order. Therefore the Frobenius map Fp on the fiber kppq b X is an auto-
morphism of finite order, and so the fiber is both geometrically reduced and finite
over kppq. Since P is infinite and since the set of prime ideals of A with geomet-
rically reduced fibers forms a constructible subset of Spec A, by EGA IV (9.7.7)
[13], the generic fiber X ˆSpec A Spec K must be geometrically reduced. Similarly,
since infinitely many fibers are finite, the generic fiber is also finite, by EGA IV
(9.2.6.2) [13]. We now use the flatness of X over A to pass from the generic fiber to
all of X. It is clear that flatness implies X is reduced. For quasi-finiteness, apply
EGA IV (14.2.4) [13].
    Therefore X is reduced and is quasi-finite over A. Affineness then follows from
Zariski’s Main Theorem, as we now explain. Let D denote the integral closure of A
in OpXq. Let X 1 denote Spec D, called the normalization of A in X in the Stacks
Project [2, Tag 035H]. Then OpXq is reduced and is flat over A, and hence so is D.
It is also finite over A, by [2, Tag 03GR]. Since X is quasi-finite, the canonical map
X Ñ X 1 is an open immersion by Zariski’s Main Theorem [2, Tag 03GW]. Finally,
since X 1 is finite flat over A, which is a Dedekind domain, its Krull dimension is 1
and hence its open subscheme X must be affine [2, Tag 09N9].
    Thus we can write X “ Spec B, where B is an f-periodic ΛA,P -ring which is
reduced and is flat, quasi-finite, and of finite type over A. It follows that K bA B
is étale over K.
    (2): It follows from statement
                             ś      (1) that there is a nonzero element t P A such that
Br1{ts is a finite product i Di , where each Di is the integral closure of Ar1{ts in a
finite extension Li of K: Indeed, since B is of finite type over A and since B bA K
is finite over K, there is an element t P A such that Br1{ts is finite flat over Ar1{ts.
Since B is reduced, so is Br1{ts, and hence the discriminant ideal of Br1{ts over
Ar1{ts is nonzero. Then by scaling t so that it lies in the discriminant ideal, and
is nonzero, we may assume that Br1{ts is finite étale over Ar1{ts. It then follows
that Br1{ts is the integral closure of Ar1{ts in K bA B and is hence of the required
form.
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                17


   Now let Pt denote the set of primes p in P that do not divide t. Then we can
consider Pt as a set of primes of Ar1{ts; and since P is Chebotarev dense, so is Pt .
Applying proposition 5.2 to the ΛAr1{ts,Pt -ring Br1{ts, we see each field K bA Di
is an abelian extension of K. Since the Frobenius elements act on each Di with
period f, the conductor of K bA Di divides f.                                     
7.4. Ray class algebras. These are Λ-ring analogues of the ray class fields of K.
   We can view DRP pfq as a pointed DRP pfq-set: the distinguished point is the
identity element, and the action is translation. By theorem 5.5, the corresponding
ΛA,P -ring over K has an integral model. Define RA,P pfq, the ray class algebra of
conductor f, to be the maximal ΛA,P -order in this K-algebra. Thus we have
                                             ź
                         K bA RA,P pfq “         Kpfd´1 q,
                                            dPIdP
                                            d|ffin

where Kpfd´1 q is the ray class field of K with conductor fd´1 . Under this identifi-
cation, the map β : RA,P pfq Ñ K sep coming from the distinguished point of DRP pfq
is the projection to the component with d “ p1q.
    In our previous paper [7], we considered the case where A “ Z and P is all
maximal ideals. There we showed that the ray class algebra of conductor pnq8 is
Zrxs{pxn ´ 1q, or more naturally, the group ring on the cyclic group µn pK sep q of
n-th roots of unity in K sep .
    Observe that the ray class algebra is not usually a domain, and in particular the
map β : RA,P pfq Ñ Kpfq to the ray class field is not usually injective. Also, unlike
the ray class field, it depends not only on f but also on A and P . On the other
hand, K bA RA,P pfq is independent of A.
    If P is Chebotarev dense, the ray class algebra RA,P pfq satisfies the following
maximality property: if D is a reduced finite flat f-periodic ΛA,P -ring equipped with
a map α : D Ñ K sep of A-algebras, then there is a unique map ϕ : D Ñ RA,P pfq of
ΛA,P -rings making the following diagram commute:
                                    K sep
                                   ④④= d❏❏❏❏
                               α ④④         ❏❏β
                                 ④            ❏❏❏
                              ④④④                ❏
                             ④          ϕ
                           D ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴/ RA,P pfq.
This is simply because, under the anti-equivalence with DRP pfq-sets, RA,P pfq cor-
responds to DRP pfq, which is the free DRP pfq-set on one generator.
7.5. Change of f. Suppose f1 “ fa. Then the maps DRP pf1 q Ñ DRP pfq and
DRP pfq ÝÑ DRP pf1 q of 4.2 induce an inclusion
(7.5.19)                      u : RA,P pfq ÝÑ RA,P pf1 q
and a surjection
(7.5.20)                      v : RA,P pf1 q ÝÑ RA,P pfq
of ΛA,P -rings, and the compositions u ˝ v and u ˝ v agree with the two ψa endomor-
phisms.
   In the case where K “ Q, P is all maximal ideals, f “ pnq8, and f1 “ pn1 q8,
these maps can be identified with the maps on group rings corresponding to the
inclusion µn pK sep q Ď µn1 pK sep q, in the case of u, and the n1 {n-th power map
µn1 pK sep q Ñ µn pK sep q, in the case of v.

                   8. Periodic loci and abelian extensions
  Let f be a cycle on K. Let X be a separated (flat) ΛA,P -scheme.
18                               J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


8.1. Periodic locus Xpfq. Define the f-periodic locus Xpfq of X to be the scheme-
theoretic intersection              č
                          Xpfq “         Xpψa “ ψb q,
                                      a,bPIdP
                                       a„f b
where Xpψa “ ψb q denotes the equalizer of the two maps ψa , ψb : X Ñ X. Since
X is separated, Xpfq is a closed subscheme. The functor Xpfq represents is
         XpfqpCq “ tx P XpCq : ψa pxq “ ψb pxq for all a, b P IdP with a „f bu.
We emphasize that Xpfq depends on P as well as f, although the notation does not
reflect this.
    Observe that Xpfq is functorial in X. It also behaves well under change of f: if
f1 is another cycle and f | f1 , then we have
                                     Xpfq Ď Xpf1 q.
   Finally, let Xpfqfl denote the maximal A-flat subscheme of Xpfq. It is the closed
subscheme of Xpfq defined by the ideal sheaf of A-torsion elements. Although the
actual periodic locus Xpfq is more fundamental than Xpfqfl , for the purposes of
this paper it is enough to consider Xpfqfl , and doing so will allow us to avoid the
subtleties of Λ-rings with torsion.
Proposition 8.2. For any ideal a P IdP , we have the subscheme inclusion
(8.2.21)                         Xpafq Ď ψa´1 pXpfqq.
Proof. Let x be a point of Xpafq with coordinates in some ring R. Let b and c be
f-equivalent ideals in IdP . Then we have ab „af ac and hence
                        `     ˘                        `      ˘
                     ψb ψa pxq “ ψab pxq “ ψac pxq “ ψc ψa pxq .
It follows that ψa pxq P Xpfq, and this implies (8.2.21).                              
8.3. Torsion locus Xrfs. Write f “ ffin f8 . Then we define the f-torsion locus by
                                 Xrfs “ ψf´1
                                          fin
                                              pXpf8 qq.
It follows from proposition 8.2 that we have an inclusion of subschemes
(8.3.22)                             Xpfq Ď Xrfs.
For example, if A “ Z, P “ MQ , and f “ pnq8, then this inclusion is an equality be-
cause both sides are µn . If however f “ pnq, then the f-torsion locus is again µn , but
the f-periodic locus Gm pfq is µm , where m “ gcdp2, nq. So the containment (8.3.22)
can be far from an equality.

     Summing up the results above with the previous section, we have the following:
Theorem 8.4. If X is of finite type over A and P is Chebotarev dense, then we
have the following:
   (1) The flat f-periodic locus Xpfqfl is a closed f-periodic sub-ΛA,P -scheme of X,
        and it is the maximal flat closed subscheme with these properties.
   (2) We have Xpfqfl “ Spec B, where B is a finitely generated A-algebra, and
        K bA B is a finite product of abelian extensions of K of conductor dividing
        f.
   (3) If X is proper, then B is a finite A-algebra.
Proof. (1) By functoriality, the subscheme Xpfq is stable under the operators ψp ,
for all p P P . Again by functoriality, Xpfqfl is also stable under them. Since the
ψp are Frobenius lifts on X, so are the endomorphisms they induce on the closed
subscheme Xpfqfl . Since Xpfqfl is flat, this defines a ΛA,P -structure on Xpfqfl . It is
obviously f-periodic. Maximality is also clear.
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                 19


   (2) This follows from proposition 7.3.
   (3) When X is proper, so is Xpfqfl , since it is a closed subscheme of X. It
therefore must be finite over A because it is flat and generically finite.   

8.5. Conjecture. Let r denote the product of all the real places. If X is proper
and nonempty, we conjecture that Xprq is nonempty.
   When K “ Q, this was proved in [5]. It is possible, however, to give an easier
argument that avoids the deep theorems in étale cohomology and p-adic Hodge
theory used there. One would expect this argument to go through for general K.

8.6. Computing the periodic locus. Is there an algorithm to find equations describ-
ing Xpfq, given equations for X and formulas for the Frobenius lifts ψp ? Without
such an algorithm, our approach to generating abelian extensions would not be so
explicit. But it also might be an indication that, for theoretical purposes, there
really is more freedom in this approach.

                   9. Interlude on periodic Witt vectors
   In this section, we define periodic Witt vectors and show how they recover the
ray class algebras of the previous section. It will not be used elsewhere in the paper.

9.1. P -typical Witt vector rings WA,P pRq. Let us review the generalized Witt
vector rings as defined in the first section of [3]. Let R be a flat A-algebra. Then
the monoid IdP acts on the product A-algebra RIdP (the so-called ghost ring) by
translation in the exponent. Explicitly, if xa denotes the a-th component of a vector
x P RIdP , then ψb : RIdP Ñ RIdP is defined by the formula
                                   `      ˘
                                    ψb pxq a “ xab .
   Now consider the set of sub-A-algebras D Ď RIdP such that D is taken to itself by
the action of IdP and such that for each prime p P P , the induced endomorphism
ψp : D Ñ D is a Frobenius lift at p. An elementary argument shows that this
collection of subrings has a maximal element WA,P pRq. It is called the ring of P -
typical Witt vectors with entries in R. It recovers the usual p-typical Witt vector
functor (restricted to torsion-free rings) when A is Z and P consists of the single
maximal ideal pZ; it recovers the big Witt vector functor when instead P consists
of all maximal ideals of Z.
   This construction is functorial in R, and one can show that the functor WA,P is
representable by a flat A-algebra ΛA,P . (Incidentally, this shows that WA,P extends
to a functor on all A-algebras, namely the one represented by ΛA,P . Thus we can
extend the theory of Λ-structures and Witt vectors to A-algebras with torsion, but
we will not need this generality here.) The endomorphisms ψa of the functor WA,P
induce endomorphisms of ΛA,P . They are in fact Frobenius lifts, and hence ΛA,P
is a ΛA,P -ring.

9.2. Universal property of Witt vector rings. The Witt vector functor is the right
adjoint of the forgetful functor from ΛA,P -rings to A-algebras. Let us spell out
the universal property for future reference. Let R be a flat A-algebra, let D be a
flat ΛA,P -ring, and let ϕ : D Ñ R be an A-algebra map. Then ϕ lifts to a unique
ΛA,P -ring map ϕ̃ to the Witt vector ring:
                                       ϕ̃
                             D ❅❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴/ WA,P pRq
                                ❅❅       D!
                                  ❅❅                ✉✉
                                    ❅            ✉✉✉
                                 ϕ   ❅❅       ✉ xÞÑxp1q
                                                ✉
                                            z✉✉
                                         R.
20                                     J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


Indeed, it lifts to a unique IdP -equivariant morphism D Ñ RIdP , given by a ÞÑ x,
where xa “ ϕpψa paqq. It remains to check that the image S of this map lies in
WA,P pRq. But S is torsion free, as a subalgebra of RIdP ; it has an action of IdP ,
as the image of an equivariant map of rings with an IdP -action; and it satisfies
the Frobenius lift condition because it is an IdP -equivariant quotient of D, which
satisfies the Frobenius lift condition. Therefore S is contained in WA,P pRq by the
maximality property of WA,P pRq.

9.3. f-periodic Witt vector rings W pfq pRq. Let f be a cycle on K. We define the
set of f-periodic Witt vectors with entries in an A-algebra R as follows
                 pfq
(9.3.23)       WA,P pRq :“ tx P WA,P pRq : ψa pxq “ ψb pxq whenever a „f bu.
                                                                                                  pfq
In other words, if we view the functor WA,P as a scheme, then WA,P pRq is the set
of R-valued points on its f-periodic locus.
   When R is flat, the periodic Witt vectors can be described simply in terms of
their ghost components:
                       pfq
(9.3.24)          WA,P pRq “ tx P WA,P pRq : xa “ xb whenever a „f bu.
Indeed, this follows from the implication a „f b ñ ac „f bc. In other words, we
have
                                 pfq
(9.3.25)                       WA,P pRq “ WA,P pRq X RDRP pfq ,
as subrings of the ghost ring RIdP .
9.4. Example. Suppose A “ Z, P “ MQ , and f “ pnq8 where n ě 1. Then an
f-periodic Witt vector with entries in a torsion-free ring R is just a big Witt vector
whose ghost components are periodic with period dividing n. This is the reason for
the name. For example, if ζn is an n-th root of unity, then the Teichmüller element
                                       rζn s :“ xζn , ζn2 , ζn3 , . . . y
is n8-periodic. (This is even true when R is not torsion free, by functoriality and
because the universal ring with an n-th root of unity is Zrxs{pxn ´ 1q, which is
torsion free.)
                         pfq
Proposition 9.5. WA,P pRq is an f-periodic sub-ΛA,P -ring of WA,P pRq, for any
flat A-algebra R.
Proof. It is clearly a sub-A-algebra of WA,P pRq. It is also preserved by all ψp
operators (p P P ) because of the implication a „f b ñ pa „f pb. The family of
                                     pfq
operators ψa is also f-periodic on WA,P pRq by definition.
   So all that remains is to check the Frobenius lift property. For p P P and any
      pfq
x P WA,P pRq, we have
                                                                             pfq
                        ψp pxq ´ xN ppq P pWA,P pRq X WA,P pRq.
Thus it is enough to show that the containment
                                 pfq                                        pfq
(9.5.26)                     pWA,P pRq Ď pWA,P pRq X WA,P pRq
is an equality. This follows from the diagram
                                                                             γ
                       / W pfq pRq
                                                                                         ś
           0                                            / W pRq
                                                                                            a„f b R
                                                                                     /
                             O                               O                                O

                           O                              O                                  śO
                                                                            pbγ
           0       / p bA W pfq pRq                / p bA W pRq                    / p bA
                                                                                                  a„f b R
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                   21


of exact sequences, where γpxq “ p. . . , xa ´ xb , . . . q. The vertical arrows are the
evident multiplication maps a b b ÞÑ ab; they are injective because all modules on
the top row are flat. This plus the exactness of the bottom row implies that (9.5.26)
is an equality.                                                                       
9.6. Remark: Plethysic algebra. The formal concepts above can be expressed in
the language of plethystic algebra [8]. Let ΛA,P be the A-algebra representing the
                         pfq                                        pfq
functor WA,P , and let ΛA,P be the one representing the functor WA,P . Then the
                         pfq                                              pfq
inclusion of functors WA,P Ď WA,P induces a surjection ΛA,P Ñ ΛA,P . It is not
hard to show that this has the structure of a morphism of A-plethories and an action
     pfq
of ΛA,P is the same as an f-periodic ΛA,P -structure. It follows that the forgetful
functor from f-periodic ΛA,P -rings to all ΛA,P -rings has both a left and a right
adjoint. The right adjoint outputs the f-periodic elements of the given ΛA,P -ring.
This provides one approach to Λ-structures and Witt vectors that works smoothly
in the presence of torsion.
9.7. Universal property of periodic Witt vector rings. Let R be a flat A-algebra,
let D be a flat f-periodic ΛA,P -ring, and let ϕ : D Ñ R be an A-algebra map. Then
ϕ lifts to a unique ΛA,P -ring map to the f-periodic Witt vector ring:
                                         ϕ̃               pfq
                               D ❃❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴/ WA,P pRq
                                  ❃❃       D!
                                    ❃❃                ✇✇
                                      ❃            ✇✇✇
                                   ϕ ❃
                                        ❃       ✇✇ xÞÑxp1q
                                              {✇✇
                                           R.
Indeed, by the universal property of Witt vectors (9.2), it lifts to a unique ΛA,P -map
                                                                            pfq
D Ñ WA,P pRq. But since D is f-periodic, the image is contained in WA,P pRq.

Proposition 9.8. Let K sep be a separable closure of K, and let Aint denote the in-
tegral closure of A in K sep . Let RA,P pfq denote the ray class ΛA,P -ring of conductor
f, as defined in 7.4. Then we have an isomorphism
                                                „   pfq
(9.8.27)                       β̃ : RA,P pfq ÝÑ WA,P pAint q
of ΛA,P -rings, where the map β̃ is the lift, in the sense of 9.7, of the projection
β : RA,P pfq Ñ Aint defined in 7.4.
                                              pfq
Proof. The ΛA,P -rings RA,P pfq and WA,P pAint q are characterized by the same uni-
versal property, except that the one for RA,P pfq is restricted to algebras D that are
                                                                     pfq
reduced and finite flat over A. So it is enough to show that WA,P pAint q is itself
reduced and finite flat over A. Since it is a subalgebra of DRP pfq Aint by definition,
                                                           ś

it is reduced and flat. So it is enough to show that it is finite over A.
    First, observe that we have
                                   pfq                          pfq
(9.8.28)                colimL WA,P pL X Aint q “ WA,P pAint q,
where L runs over the finite extensions of K contained in K sep . Indeed, for any
       pfq
x P WA,P pAint q, let L denote the extension Kp. . . , xa , . . . q, where the xa are the
(ghost) components of x. It follows that x P WA,P pLq X WA,P pAint q. Because WA,P
is representable, we also have
                     WA,P pLq X WA,P pAint q “ WA,P pL X Aint q,
and hence x P WA,P pL X Aint q. Because x is also f-periodic, we have
                                         pfq
                                  x P WA,P pL X Aint q,
22                              J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


as desired. It remains to show that L is a finite extension of K. This holds because
x is f-periodic and DRP pfq is finite, and so x has only finitely many distinct ghost
components. This proves (9.8.28).
                                              pfq
   Therefore it is enough to prove that WA,P pL X Aint q has bounded rank as L
                                                                     pfq
runs over all finite extensions of K. By proposition 9.5, WA,P pL X Aint q is a flat
reduced f-periodic ΛA,P -ring. Being a subring of DRP pfq L X Aint, it is also finitely
                                                 ś

generated
    ś as an A-module. Therefore by theorem 5.5, it is contained in the product
ring d Kpfd´1 q X Aint , where d runs over IdP with d | ffin . Therefore its rank as
L varies is bounded.                                                                 
9.9. Example. If A “ Z, P “ MQ , and f “ pnq8 with n ě 1, then for any primitive
n-th root of unity ζn , there is an isomorphism
                                             „      pn8q
                            Zrxs{pxn ´ 1q ÝÑ WZ,P pOQ̄ q
given by x ÞÑ rζn s. Given the above, this is the second theorem of our first paper [7].
   On the other hand, if f “ p1q but K is arbitrary and P “ MK , then we have
                                      p1q
                                    WOK ,P pOK̄ q “ OH
where H is the Hilbert class field of K. More generally, if f is supported at infinity,
       pfq
then WOK ,P pOK̄ q is the ring of integers in the corresponding narrow Hilbert class
field.
Corollary 9.10. The periodic Witt vector ring is generically a product of ray class
fields:
                              pfq
                                            ź
(9.10.29)            K bA WA,P pAint q “         Kpfd´1 q.
                                                 dPIdP
                                                 d|ffin

The ray class field Kpfq is the image of the projection
                                pfq
(9.10.30)             K bA WA,P pAint q ÝÑ K sep ,         x ÞÑ xp1q .
9.11. Remark: Periodic Witt vectors and explicit class field theory. It follows
from corollary 9.10 that any ray class field Kpfq is generated by the first coordinate
xp1q of the f-periodic Aint -points x on the affine scheme WA,P “ SpecpΛA,P q. We
emphasize however that WA,P is not of finite type, and so this does not give an
explicit method of producing a polynomial whose roots generate Kpfq. In fact,
                       pfq
the periodic locus WA,P is itself not even of finite type. For instance, if K “ Q,
                              pfq
P “ MQ , and f “ 8, then ΛA,P is isomorphic to the binomial ring, the subring of
Qrxs generated by the binomial coefficients nx , and this is not finitely generated
                                               ` ˘
                                              pfq
as a ring. Therefore to find a point of WA,P , one has to solve infinitely many
simultaneous polynomial equations with coefficients in A.
                      pfq
    To be sure, KbA ΛA,P is finitely generated as a K-algebra, because on K-algebras
it represents the periodic ghost functor R ÞÑ RDRP pfq and DRP pfq is finite. There-
fore a periodic Witt vector is determined by finitely many components, namely its
ghost components. However to give a criterion for a periodic ghost vector to be a
Witt vector, we need infinitely many congruences between polynomials in the ghost
components. If we add variables to express these congruences as equations, we will
need infinitely many new variables.

             10. K “ Q: the toric line and the Chebyshev line
   In this section, we consider the case where A is Z and P is the set of all maximal
ideals of Z. For any integer n ě 1, let us write ψn “ ψpnq and Λ “ ΛZ,P .
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                     23


10.1. The toric line and cyclotomic extensions. Define the toric Λ-structure on
Gm “ Spec Zrx˘1 s to be the one given by ψp pxq “ xp , for all primes numbers p.
(We use this name because it is a particular case of the natural Λ-structure on any
toric variety.) Observe that it extends uniquely to the affine and projective lines.
   For each cycle of the form pnq8, with n ě 1, the periodic locus Gm pn8q is
simply µn “ Spec Zrxs{pxn ´ 1q. In other words, the containment (8.3.22) is an
equality. Thus we have
                                           ž
                          Q bZ Gm pn8q “       Spec Qpζd q.
                                                d|n

So in this case, the n8-periodic locus of the Λ-scheme Gm does in fact generate
the ray class field of conductor n8.

10.2. The Chebyshev line and real-cyclotomic extensions. The toric Λ-ring Zrx˘1 s
above has an automorphism σ defined by σpxq “ x´1 . The fixed subring is easily
seen to be a sub-Λ-ring and freely generated as a ring by y “ x` x´1 . The elements
ψp pyq P Zrys are given by Chebyshev polynomials
                                         n´1
                                         ź
                          ψn pyq “ 2 `         py ´ ζni ´ ζn´i q,
                                         i“0

where ζn is a primitive n-th root of unity. For example, we have
    ψ2 pyq “ y 2 ´ 2,     ψ3 pyq “ y 3 ´ 3y,          ψ5 pyq “ y 5 ´ 5y 3 ` 5y,   ....
This gives the affine line Y “ Spec Zrys a Λ-scheme structure. We call it the
Chebyshev Λ-structure. It also extends uniquely to the projective line. (Inciden-
tally, Zrys is isomorphic as a Λ-ring to the Grothendieck group of the Lie algebra
sl2 . By Clauwens’s theorem [9], this and the toric Λ-structure are the only two
Λ-structures on the affine line, up to isomorphism.)
    Now consider a cycle f with trivial infinite part. Write f “ pnq, where n ě 1, and
write Y pnq “ Y pfq for the periodic locus. We have
                         Y r1s “ Y p1q “ Spec Zrys{py ´ 2q,
and hence the n-torsion locus is
                           Y rns “ ψn´1 pSpec Zrys{py ´ 2qq
or more simply, Y rns “ ψn´1 p2q. Observe that Y rns is not reduced when n ě 3: for
instance if n is odd, we have
                                                            n´1
                        n´1
                        ź                              2
                                                       ź
           ψn pyq ´ 2 “    py ´ ζni ´ ζn´i q “ py ´ 2q   py ´ ζni ´ ζn´i q2 .
                         i“0                                i“1

However the periodic locus is reduced. In fact, we have
                                          ź
                        Q bZ OpY pnqq “      Qpζd ` ζd´1 q,
                                               d|n

by the following more precise integral result:
Proposition 10.3.        (1) The periodic locus Y pnq is flat and reduced, and the
      inclusion
                                 i : Y pnq Ñ Y rnsred
        is an isomorphism.
    (2) The map OpY pnqq Ñ Zrxs{pxn ´ 1q is injective. If n is odd, its image is
        the subring of invariants under the involution σ : x ÞÑ x´1 . If n is even,
        its image is the span of t1, x ` x´1 , . . . , xn{2´1 ` x1´n{2 , 2xn{2 u.
24                                J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


Proof. (1): Consider the differences of Chebyshev polynomials
                             Pa,b pyq :“ ψa pyq ´ ψb pyq P Zrys.
Then the periodic locus Y pnq is Spec Zrys{I, where
                         `                                ˘
                     I “ Pa,b pyq | a ” ˘b mod n, a, b ě 1 .
Let Qpyq denote the product of the monic irreducible factors of pψn pyq ´ 2q, each
taken only with multiplicity 1. If n is odd, we have
                                           n´1
                                           ź2

                                Qpyq “           py ´ ζni ´ ζn´i q.
                                           i“0
and if n is even, we have
                                            n
                                           2
                                           ź
                                Qpyq “           py ´ ζni ´ ζn´i q.
                                           i“0
Then we have
                                       I Ď pQpyqq
since each Pa,b pyq vanishes at y “ ζni ` ζn´i , for each i. Therefore to prove (1), it is
enough to show this containment is an equality.
   Since Zrx˘1 s is a faithfully flat extension of Zrys, it is enough to show this after
base change to Zrx˘1 s. In other words, it is enough to show
                  Qpx ` x´1 q P Pa,b px ` x´1 q | a ” ˘b mod n .
                                  `                                  ˘

We have
          Pa,b px ` x´1 q “ xa ` x´a ´ xb ´ x´b “ x´a pxa`b ´ 1qpxa´b ´ 1q.
Therefore we have
                        Pn`1,1 px ` x´1 q “ pxn ´ 1qpxn`2 ´ 1q ,
                       `                 ˘ `                  ˘

                        Pn`2,2 px ` x´1 q “ pxn ´ 1qpxn`4 ´ 1q
                       `                 ˘ `                  ˘

and hence
        Pn`1,1 px ` x´1 q, Pn`2,2 px ` x´1 q “ xn ´ 1 px2 ´ 1q, pxn ´ 1q .
       `                                    ˘ `      ˘`                 ˘

If n is odd, then we have
          x ´ 1 px2 ´ 1q, pxn ´ 1q “ pxn ´ 1qpx ´ 1q “ Qpx ` x´1 q .
         ` n     ˘`               ˘ `               ˘ `           ˘

Similarly, if n is even
         x ´ 1 px2 ´ 1q, pxn ´ 1q “ pxn ´ 1qpx2 ´ 1q “ Qpx ` x´1 q .
        ` n      ˘`              ˘ `                ˘ `           ˘

Thus in either case, we have
                    Qpx ` x´1 q P Pn`1,1 px ` x´1 q, Pn`2,2 px ` x´1 q
                                 `                                    ˘
                                  `                                    ˘
                                Ď Pa,b pyq | a ” ˘b mod n, a, b ě 1 .
   (2): Suppose a polynomial f pyq P Zrys maps to zero in Zrxs{pxn ´ 1q. Then we
have f pζni ` ζn´i q “ 0 for all i. Therefore we have py ´ ζni ´ ζn´i q | f pyq. Thus if n
is odd, we have
                                 n´1
                                 ź2

                                       py ´ ζni ´ ζn´1 q | f pyq
                                 i“0
and if n is even,
                                  n
                                 2
                                 ź
                                   py ´ ζni ´ ζn´1 q | f pyq.
                                 i“0
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                    25


In either case, we have Qpyq | f pyq. Therefore the map Zrys{pQpyqq Ñ Zrxs{pxn ´1q
is injective.
    Let us now consider surjectivity. When n is odd, the set
                                               n´1        n´1
                           t1, x ` x´1 , . . . , x 2 ` x´ 2 u
                             `                    ˘σ
is a Z-basis for the subring Zrxs{pxn ´ 1q of σ-invariants, and this is contained
in the image of Zrys. When n is even, t1, x ` x´1 , . . . , xn{2´1 ` x1´n{2 , xn{2 u is a
Z-basis. All these elements but xn{2 lie in the image of Zrys. However 2xn{2 does
lie in the image.                                                                      
Corollary 10.4. The map
                                 OpY pnqq ÝÑ RZ,P pnq
to the ray class algebra given by the point ζn ` ζn´1 P Y pnqpOQ̄ q is injective. If n is
odd, it is surjective; if n is even, its  ścokernel is a group  of order 2 generated by the
                                                         ´1
class of r´1s “ x. . . , p´1qd , . . . y P d|n Qpζn{d ` ζn{d q.

Proof. By the map Zrxs{pxn ´ 1q Ñ OQ̄ given by x ÞÑ ζn results in a diagram

                            Zrxs{pxn ´ 1q            / RZ,P pn8q
                                  O                         O

                          `       O     ˘σ                 O
                           Zrxs{pxn ´ 1q             / RZ,P pnq.

By the second theorem in our first paper [7], the top map is an isomorphism. Since
taking maximal Λ-orders commutes with taking group invariants, by part (2) of
proposition 2.2, the bottom arrow is also an isomorphism. Observe that when n is
even, the image of xn{2 is r´1s. Now invoke proposition 10.3.                   

11. K imaginary quadratic: CM elliptic curves and the Lattès scheme
   Let K be an imaginary quadratic field. For convenience, let us fix an embedding
K Ă C. In this section, we show how explicit class field theory over K, due to
Kronecker and his followers, can be set naturally in the framework of this paper.
This builds on Gurney’s thesis [14]. The arguments are similar in spirit to those in
the real-cyclotomic context in the previous section.
   Let us write
                        Λ “ ΛOK ,MK and Λp “ ΛOKp ,p ,
where p P P is any given prime.

11.1. The moduli space of CM elliptic curves. Let R be an OK -algebra. Then
a CM elliptic curve over R is an elliptic curve E over R together with a ring
map OK Ñ EndR pEq such that the induced action of OK on the tangent space
T0 pEq agrees with the OK -algebra structure map OK Ñ R “ EndR pT0 pEqq. Let
MCM pRq denote the category whose objects are the CM elliptic curves over R and
whose morphisms are the OK -equivariant isomorphisms of elliptic curves. Since
all morphisms are isomorphisms, MCM pRq is a groupoid by definition. As the
OK -algebra R varies, the usual base-change maps make MCM a fibered category
over the category of affine OK -schemes. Further, this fibered category satisfies
effective descent for the fppf topology because all ingredients in its definition can be
expressed in terms which are fppf-local. In other words, MCM is a stack. (See [16]
the theory of stacks.) Let E Ñ MCM denote the universal object. Then EpRq is the
groupoid of pairs pE, xq, where E is a CM elliptic curve over R, and x is a point of
EpRq.
26                               J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


   Both E and MCM have certain endomorphisms ψa , for any integral ideal a Ď OK ,
defined as follows. On MCM , the map ψa is defined by
                                   ψa : E ÞÑ a´1 b E,
where the elliptic curve a´1 bE is the Serre tensor product [19], defined as a functor
by
                         ` ´1
                          a b E pCq :“ a´1 bOK EpCq ,
                                  ˘                  `    ˘

for any algebra C over the base R of E. (This is again an elliptic curve: since
a´1 is a direct summand of OK   2
                                  , the functor a´1 b E is a direct summand of the
abelian variety E 2 .) In particular, if R “ C and the period lattice of E is L, so
that EpCq “ C{L, then a´1 b E is the elliptic curve with period lattice a´1 bOK L,
up to canonical isomorphism.
   Using the isogeny E Ñ a´1 b E defined by x ÞÑ 1 b x, we can then define the
endomorphism ψa : E Ñ E by
                            ψa : pE, xq ÞÑ pa´1 b E, 1 b xq.
Observe that it lies over the endomorphism ψa of MCM .
   The ψa operators should be thought of as providing a Λ-structure on MCM and
E, but MCM and E are stacks and we will not define what Λ-structures on stacks
are here. Let us just say that the ψa operators, whether on MCM or E, commute up
to a coherent family of canonical isomorphisms coming from the usual associators
pU b V q b W Ñ U b pV b W q on the category of OK -modules. Similarly, if a is a
prime p, then the reduction of ψp modulo p agrees with the N ppq-power Frobenius
map Fp , in the sense that for any elliptic curve E over an Fp -algebra, there is unique
isomorphism ψp pEq Ñ Fp pEq compatible with the canonical maps from E.

11.2. Lattès scheme. We follow Gurney’s thesis [14]. Let L denote the coarse
space underlying E. It is the functor defined, for any OK -algebra C, by
              LpCq “ tlocal-isomorphism classes of triples pC 1 , E, xqu,
where C 1 is an fppf cover of C, and E is a CM elliptic curve over C 1 , and x P EpC 1 q
and where two pairs pC11 , E1 , x1 q and pC21 , E2 , x2 q are in the same local-isomorphism
class if C11 and C21 have a common fppf cover C 2 such that when pulled back to C 2 ,
there is an isomorphism between E1 and E2 identifying x1 and x2 . Observe that if
C “ C (or any algebraically closed field), we have
                    LpCq “ tisomorphism classes of pairs pE, xqu,
where E is a CM elliptic curve over C and x P EpCq. Thus LpCq is the union of
hK copies of P1 pCq, where hK is the class number of K.
   The functor L is an OK -scheme (see 4.3.10 of [14]), which we call the Lattès
scheme, and unless we say otherwise we will view it as an OK -scheme. Note however
that the structure map L Ñ Spec OK factors naturally through the coarse space
underlying MCM , which Gurney shows (2.6.10 of [14]) is Spec OH , where H is the
Hilbert class field of K in C:
                            ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴ ❴/ Spec OH
                           L●
                             ●●                    q
                               ●●
                                 ●●           qqqqq
                                   ●●        q
                                     #   xqqq
                                   Spec OK
So one can also view L as an OH -scheme, and sometimes we will.
  For example, given any CM elliptic curve E over R, we have an identification
                                                      ˚
(11.2.31)                   L ˆSpecpOH q SpecpRq “ E{OK .
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                   27


(This can in fact serve as an alternative definition of L.) The universal map E Ñ L
is then nothing more than the classical Weber function expressed in our language.
Gurney (4.3.16 of [14]) proves there exists an isomorphism L Ñ P1OH of OH -schemes.
(The fact that L is a P1 -bundle over OH is expected, but the fact that it is the trivial
bundle requires more work.) It follows that as an OK -scheme, L has geometrically
disconnected fibers if hK ą 1. We also emphasize that there appears to be no
canonical isomorphism L Ñ P1OH . There is a canonical OH -point 8 P LpOH q, which
corresponds to pairs of the form pE, 0q. The isomorphism L Ñ P1OH would then
typically be chosen to send 8 to 8, but we cannot make any further restrictions, it
seems. So the isomorphism L Ñ P1OH is canonically defined only up to the action
                                                                ˚
of the stabilizer group of 8, the semi-direct product OH ¸ OH     .
    The endomorphisms ψa of E induce endomorphisms ψa : L Ñ L (morphisms of
OK -schemes). Then ψp for p prime reduces to the N ppq-power Frobenius map Fp
modulo p, and hence the ψa define a Λ-structure on L. (See 4.3.11 of [14].) Further
the map L Ñ Spec OH above is a morphism of Λ-schemes, where OH is given its
unique Λ-ring structure.
    When expressed in terms of P1OH , the endomorphisms ψa are often call the Lattès
functions, as for example in Milnor’s book [17] (page 72), which explains the name.

Proposition 11.3.       (1) LrfspCq is the set of isomorphism classes of pairs pE, xq,
       where E is a complex CM elliptic curve and x P ErfspCq.
   (2) The action of IdP on LrfspCq, where a acts as ψa , factors through an action
       (necessarily unique) of DRP pfq on LrfspCq. The resulting DRP pfq-set is a
       torsor generated by any class of the form pE0 , x0 q, where E0 is a CM elliptic
       curve and x0 is a generator of E0 rfspCq as an OK -module.

Proof. (1): Any point of y P LpCq is the isomorphism class of a pair pE, xq, where
E is a complex CM elliptic curve and x P EpCq. Under ψf , the pair pE, xq maps to
pf´1 b E, 1 b xq. So if y lies in the f-torsion locus LrfspCq, the object pf´1 b E, 1 b xq
must be isomorphic to one of the form pE 1 , 0q. Therefore the point 1 b x P pf´1 b
EqpCq is 0, and hence x is an f-torsion point of E.
   (2): Let us first show that the orbit of pE0 , x0 q under IdP is all of LrfspCq. Let
pE, xq be an element of LrfspCq. Then there is an integral ideal a Ď OK such that
there exists an isomorphism of elliptic curves f : a´1 b E0 Ñ E. We can choose a
such that it is coprime to f. It follows that the image 1 b x0 P a´1 b E0 pCq of x0 is
a generator of pa´1 b E0 qrfspCq, and hence that f p1 b x0 q is a generator of ErfspCq.
In other words, there exists an element b P OK such that bf p1 b x0 q “ x. Then we
have

             ψba pE0 , x0 q “ pb´1 a´1 b E0 , 1 b x0 q – pa´1 b E0 , b b x0 q
                          – pE, f pb b x0 qq “ pE, bf p1 b x0 qq “ pE, xq.

Therefore pE0 , x0 q generates LrfspCq as a DRP pfq-set.
  It remains to show

                       a „f b ðñ ψa ppE0 , x0 qq “ ψb ppE0 , x0 qq,

for any two ideals a, b P IdP .
   First consider the direction ñ. The equality ψa ppE0 , x0 qq “ ψb ppE0 , x0 qq is
equivalent to the existence of an isomorphism pa´1 bE0 , 1bx0 q – pb´1 bE0 , 1bx0 q.
Since a „f b, by 4.3, there exists an element t P K such that a “ bt and t´ 1 P fb´1 .
So it is enough to show that the isomorphism
                                           tb1
(11.3.32)                       a´1 b E0 ÝÑ b´1 b E0
28                                J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


given by multiplication by t b 1, sends 1 b x0 on the left to 1 b x0 on the right. In
other words, it is enough to show that the two elements 1 b x0 , t b x0 P b´1 b E0 pCq
agree.
   We give an argument using period lattices. Write E0 pCq “ C{c, where c is a
fractional ideal of K, and let y P C be a coset representative of x0 P C{c. Then the
morphism (11.3.32) above is identified with
                                               t
                                     C{a´1 c ÝÑ C{b´1 c.
So what we want to show is equivalent to the congruence
                                     ty ” y    mod b´1 c.
But since x0 is an f-torsion element of C{c, we have y P f´1 c, and hence we have
                             pt ´ 1qy P fb´1 ¨ f´1 c “ b´1 c,
as desired.
   Now consider the direction ð. So assume ψa pE0 , x0 q – ψb pE0 , x0 q. This means
there is an isomorphism
                                         t
                                C{a´1 c ÝÑ C{b´1 c,
given by multiplication by some element t P K ˚ with ptq “ ab´1 , such that tx0 “ x0 .
Therefore the diagram
                                         id
                               f´1 c{c       / f´1 c{c


                                                         
                                                t
                                  C{a´1 c            / C{b´1 c
commutes, since the two ways around the diagram agree on x0 , which is a generator
of f´1 c{c. Therefore the difference map t ´ 1 : f´1 c{c Ñ C{b´1 c is zero. This implies
pt ´ 1qf´1 c Ď b´1 c and hence t ´ 1 P fb´1 . It follows from 4.3 that a „f b.        
Proposition 11.4. Let f be an integral ideal in OK . Then we have equalities
                                Lpfqfl “ Lpfqred “ Lrfsred
of closed subschemes of L.
Proof. We have the following diagram of containments of closed subschemes of L:
                                         α    / Lpfqfl /     / Lpfq
                             Lpfqred /
                                                               
                                 β
                                                              
                             Lrfsred /        / Lrfsfl /     / Lrfs

(As an aside, we note that Lrfs is finite flat of degree N pfq over OH , by 4.3.11 of [14],
and hence Lrfsfl “ Lrfs.) Observe that α is an isomorphism, by (7.3), and so it
is enough to show that β is an isomorphism. It is enough to show this after base
change to C, since β is a closed immersion and Lrfsred is flat over OK . Further,
since the schemes in question are of finite type, it is enough to show that β induces
a surjection on complex points, or in other words that the inclusion
                                     LpfqpCq ãÑ LrfspCq
is surjective. But this follows from 11.3, which says that LrfspCq is f-periodic.        
Corollary 11.5. The map Erfs Ñ L factors through the closed subscheme Lpfqfl of
L.
Proof. By functoriality, it factors through Lrfs. Because Erfs is reduced, it factors
further through Lrfsred . Therefore, by 11.4, it factors through Lpfqfl .          
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                     29


Proposition 11.6. Let R be a flat OK -algebra over which there is a CM elliptic
                                                    ˚
curve E. Fix an ideal f Ď OK , and write G “ OK       . Let LR pfqfl denote the base
change of Lpfqfl from OH to R. Then we have the following:
    (1) The map OpLR pfqfl q Ñ OpErfsqG induced by corollary 11.5 is injective.
    (2) Its cokernel is a finitely generated R{nR-module, where n is the order of
          ˚
        OK  .
    (3) For any sufficiently divisible integer m, there exists a (unique) morphism
        making the following diagram commute:
                             OpLR pmfqfl q /           / OpErmfsqG
                                                          ♦
                                                 ♦   ♦ ♦
                                         w♦ ♦
                                                                 
                                OpLR pfqfl q /              / OpErfsqG .

Proof. Write LR “ E{G – P1R . Then LR pfqfl is a closed subscheme of LR , and
by 11.5, we have the following containment of closed subschemes of E:
                                        Erfs Ď LR pfqfl ˆLR E.
Let If pRq denote the deal sheaf on LR pfqfl ˆLR E corresponding to Erfs; so we have
the short exact sequence
(11.6.33)             0 ÝÑ If pRq ÝÑ OpLR pfqfl ˆLR Eq ÝÑ OpErfsq ÝÑ 0.
Its long exact sequence of group cohomology begins
(11.6.34)   0 ÝÑ If pRqG ÝÑ OpLR pfqfl ˆLR EqG ÝÑ OpErfsqG ÝÑ H 1 pG, If pRqq.
  We would like to simplify this sequence using the fact that the map
(11.6.35)                  OpLR pfqfl q Ñ OpLR pfqfl ˆLR EqG
is an isomorphism, which we will now show. We have the following diagram of G-
equivariant quasi-coherent sheaves on LR (dropping the usual direct-image notation
for simplicity):
               0          / OLR                      / OE                  /M     /0


                                                                          
               0        / OL pfq              / OL pfq ˆ                   / M̄   / 0,
                            R      fl            R     fl   LR E


where the rows are exact, M and M̄ being defined to be the cokernels as shown.
We know OLR “ OE    G
                      , and so we have pQ bZ M qG “ 0 and hence pQ bZ M̄ qG “ 0.
Therefore the map (11.6.35) becomes an isomorphism after tensoring with Q. To
show it is an isomorphism, it is therefore enough to show it is surjective. Also
observe that both sides are torsion free. So let b be a G-invariant element of
OpLR pfqfl ˆLR Eq. Then we have b “ a{n, for some a P OpLR pfqfl q and some
integer n ě 1. Therefore a becomes a multiple of n in OpLR pfqfl ˆLR Eq. But
because LR pfqfl ˆLR E is faithfully flat over LR pfqfl , it must be a multiple of n
already in OpLR pfqfl q. Therefore b is in OpLR pfqfl q, and so the map (11.6.35) is
surjective, and hence an isomorphism.
   Thus we can rewrite the long exact sequence (11.6.34) as
(11.6.36)          0 ÝÑ If pRqG ÝÑ OpLR pfqfl q ÝÑ OpErfsqG ÝÑ H 1 pG, If pRqq.
Using this sequence, we will prove parts (1)–(3).
   (1): We will show If pRqG “ 0. First, observe that If pRqG is a flat-local construc-
tion in R: if R1 {R is flat, we have If pR1 q “ R1 bR If pRq and hence
                       If pR1 qG “ pR1 bR If pRqqG “ R1 bR If pRqG
30                                 J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


since taking invariants under the action of a finite group commutes with flat base
change.
   Second, since If pRq is a submodule of OpLR pfqfl q, which by construction is flat
over OK , its invariant subgroup If pRqG is also flat over OK and hence maps injec-
tively to

            C bOK If pRqG “ pC bOK Rq bR If pRqG “ If pC bOK RqG .

Therefore to show If pRqG “ 0, it is enough to do it in the case where R is a
C-algebra; and because any C-algebra is flat over C, we can apply the flat-local
property again and conclude that it is enough to assume R “ C, which we will now
do.
   Summing up, we have the diagram

                         Erfs /        / LC pfqfl ˆL E /        /E
                                                     C




                                                                  
                                            LC pfqfl /          / LC

where E Ñ LC is a G-Galois cover of complex curves, the horizontal    À maps are
closed immersions, and Erfs and LC pfqfl are reduced. Write If pCq “ Z IZ , where
Z runs over the G-orbits of ErfspCq and the ideal IZ of OpLC pfqfl ˆLC Eq is the part
of If pCq supported at Z. It is then enough to show IZG “ 0 for each Z. So consider
the filtration of IZ by its powers:

                              IZ Ě IZ2 Ě ¨ ¨ ¨ Ě IZe “ t0u,

where e is the ramification index of E over L at Z, or equivalently the order of
the stabilizer subgroup H Ď G of a point x P Z. Then it is enough to show
pIZn {IZn`1 qG “ 0 for n “ 1, . . . , e ´ 1.
    This holds vacuously if e “ 1. So assume e ą 1. For n ď e ´ 1, the G-
representation IZn {IZn`1 is the induced representation IndG
                                                           H pU
                                                                bn
                                                                   q where and U “
Ix {Ix2 is the cotangent space of E at x. Therefore we have

                                  pIZn {IZn`1 qG “ pU bn qH .

Observe that as a representation of H, the cotangent space U is isomorphic to the
                                               ˚
restriction to H of the representation of G “ OK on C given by usual multiplication.
Therefore U bn is the one-dimensional representation on which a generator ζ P H
acts as multiplication by ζ n . But since n ă e, and since e is the order of H, we
have ζ n ‰ 1. Therefore ζ acts nontrivially on U bn and hence we have

                             pIZn {IZn`1 qG “ pU bn qH “ 0,

as desired.
   (2): By general properties of group cohomology, H 1 pG, If pRqq is an R-module
of exponent dividing n, and hence an R{nR-module. The cokernel in question is a
sub-R-module of H 1 pG, If pRqq and is therefore also an R{nR-module. It remains
to show it is finitely generated. Since it is a quotient of OpErfsqG , it is enough to
show that OpErfsqG is finitely generated, and hence enough to show this locally on
R. But locally E descends to some finitely generated OK -algebra over which R is
flat. Since the formation of OpErfsqG commutes with flat base change, it is enough
to show finite generation in the case where R is a finitely generated OK -algebra.
Here it holds because Erfs is finite flat and R is noetherian.
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                                  31


  (3): Write If “ If pRq. Then by part (1), for any m ě 1,we have a morphism of
exact sequences
             0           / OpLR pmfqfl q                / OpErmfsqG          / H 1 pG, Imf q

                                                                                     α
                                                                                   
             0               / OpLR pfqfl q             / OpErfsqG           / H 1 pG, If q.

To prove (3), it is enough to show the map α above is zero for sufficiently divisible
m. Since If is torsion free, it is enough by lemma 11.7 below to show that the map
Imf Ñ If is zero modulo n for sufficiently divisible m. Further, by part (2), it is
enough to show this instead modulo each prime dividing n—that is, it is enough
to show that for each prime p | n, there exists an integer m such that the map
Imf Ñ If is zero modulo p.
    So fix a prime p | n. Let Ep denote the reduction of E modulo p, which is an
elliptic curve over R{pR. Then for any j ě 0, we have a morphism of short exact
sequences
     0       / Ipj f {pIpj f             / OpLR ppj fqfl ˆLR Ep q        / OpEp rpf fsq        /0


                                                                                
     0           / If {pIf                / OpLR pfqfl ˆLR Ep q              / OpEp rfsq       / 0.

(Left-exactness is because Erfs and Erpj fs are flat.) Now whether the fibers of
Ep are supersingular or ordinary, the closed subschemes Ep rpj fs contain arbitrary
nilpotent thickenings of Ep rfs, for large enough j. Since LR pfqfl ˆL Ep is a nilpotent
thickening of Ep rfs, we can take j such that Ep rpj fs contains LR pfqfl ˆL Ep . Thus
the map
                                  Ipj f {pIpj f ÝÑ If {pIf
is zero, and hence so is the map Ipj f Ñ If {pIf , as desired.                        
Lemma 11.7. Let G be a finite group, and let n denote its order. Let M Ñ N
be a morphism of G-modules which vanishes modulo n, and assume N is n-torsion
free. Then the induced map H i pG, M q Ñ H i pG, N q is zero, for all i ě 1.
Proof. Since our given map M Ñ N vanishes modulo n and N is n-torsion free, it
factors as
                                M✤ ❇
                                       ❇
                                  ✤ ❇❇❇
                                   ✤      ❇❇
                                           ❇!
                                         n /
                                N              N.
Hence the induced map on cohomology factors similarly
                                        H i pG, M q
                                              ✤ ▼▼▼
                                               ✤     ▼▼▼
                                                 ✤      ▼▼▼
                                                          ▼&
                                                       n /
                                        H i pG, N q        H i pG, N q
However H i pG, N q is a n-torsion group for i ě 1, because G has exponent dividing
n. Therefore the bottom map is zero and hence so is the diagonal map.             
Corollary 11.8. With the notation of proposition 11.6, the map
                       ´            ¯    ´          ¯
                        OpLR pfqfl q ÝÑ OpErfsqG
                                                    f                    f
of pro-rings is an isomorphism.
32                                J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


Proposition 11.9. Let p be a prime of OK , let R be a finite unramified extension
of OKp , and let E be a CM elliptic curve over R. Then for any integer r ě 0,
OpErpr sq is Λp -normal over OKp .
Proof. We follow (3.1) of [7], which is the analogous result for Gm .
   For r “ 0, it is clear. So we may assume that r ě 1 and, by induction, that
OpErpr´1 sq is Λp -normal over OKp .
   The pr -torsion Erpr s can be obtained by gluing the pr´1 -torsion Erpr´1 s and the
locus of exact order pr , as follows. Let Dr denote OpErpr sq. Let π be a generator
of pOKp , and consider the Lubin–Tate polynomial hpzq P Rrzs for E with respect
to the uniformizer π and some fixed local coordinate. So we have hpzq “ zgpzq,
where gpzq is a monic Eisenstein polynomial with gp0q “ π. Then Dr is identified
with Rrzs{ph˝r pzqq. Because h˝r pzq “ h˝r´1 pzq ¨ gph˝r´1 pzqq, we have the following
diagram of quotients of Rrzs:

                 Rrzs{ph˝r pzqq                   / Rrzs{ph˝r´1pzqq


                                                        
              Rrzs{pgph˝r´1pzqqq          / Rrzs{ph˝r´1pzq, gph˝r´1 pzqqq.

Observe that gph˝r´1 pzqq is a monic Eisenstein polynomial. For degree reasons, it
does not divide h˝r´1 pzq, and so the least common multiple of these two polynomials
is their product. Therefore we have
                       ph˝r pzqq “ ph˝r´1 pzqq X pgph˝r´1 pzqqq,
and hence the diagram above is a pull-back diagram. Further, if we put Br “
Rrzs{pgph˝r´1pzqqq, then Br is the ring of integers in a totally ramified extension
of Kp . Let πr P Br denote the corresponding uniformizer, namely the coset of z.
Thus we have a pull-back diagram
                                     Dr      / / Dr´1


                                                   
                                     Br       / / B̄r ,

where B̄r “ Br {ph˝r´1 pπr qq. Further observe that the element h˝r´1 pπr q P Br is
a root of gpzq, which is an Eisenstein polynomial of degree q ´ 1, where we write
q “ N ppq. Therefore we have vp ph˝r´1 pπr qq “ 1{pq ´ 1q, where vp is the valuation
normalized such that vp pπq “ 1.
   Now suppose C is a sub-Λp -ring of Kp bOKp Dr which is finite over OKp . The
maximality statement we wish to prove is that C is contained in Dr “ Br ˆB̄r
Dr´1 . By induction, Dr´1 is Λp -normal over OKp , and hence the image of C in
Kp bOKp Dr´1 is contained in Dr´1 . Similarly, since Br is a maximal order in the
usual sense, the image of C in Kp bOKp Br is contained in Br . Putting the two
together, we have the containment C Ď Br ˆ Dr´1 .
   To show C Ď Br ˆB̄r Dr´1 , let us suppose that this does not hold. Then there
is an element pb, f pzqq P C Ď Br ˆ Dr´1 such that b and f pzq do not become equal
in B̄r . In other words, we have
                              vp pb ´ f pπr qq ă 1{pq ´ 1q.
Further we can choose pb, f pzqq P C such that vp pb ´ f pπr qq is as small as possible.
Write a “ vp pb ´ f pπr qq. Since C is a sub-Λp -ring of Kp bOKp Dr , we know

                           pb, f pzqqq ´ ψp ppb, f pzqqq P πC
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                   33


The left side can be simplified using the fact ψp pzq “ hpzq on Dr :
                                                                    q
             pb, f pzqqq ´ ψp ppb, f pzqqq “ pbq ´ f ˚ phpπr qq, f pzq ´ f ˚ phpzqqq
where f ˚ pzq the polynomial obtained by applying the Frobenius map to each coef-
ficient of f pzq. Therefore by the minimality of a, we have
               ´ bq ´ f ˚ phpπ qq f pzqq ´ f ˚ phpzqq ˇ          ¯      ´ bq ´ f pπ qq ¯
                              r                                                    r
        a ď vp                    ´                                “ vp
                                                           ˇ
                         π                    π                                π
                                                           ˇ
                                                            z“πr
               ´ pb ´ f pπ qqq                                 ¯
                           r
          “ vp                  ` pb ´ f pπr qq ¨ cpb, f pπr qq
                       π
where cpX, Y q denotes the polynomial
                           pX q ´ Y q q ´ pX ´ Y qq
                                                    P OKp rX, Y s.
                                 πpX ´ Y q
But again by the minimality of a, we know a ď vp pb ´ f pπr qq. Therefore we have
                                ´ pb ´ f pπ qqq ¯
                                           r
                         a ď vp                   “ qa ´ 1
                                        π
and hence a ě 1{pq ´ 1q. This contradicts the assumption a ă 1{pq ´ 1q.         
Lemma 11.10. Let A “ OK r1{ts, for some t P OK , and let R be a Λ-ring, finite
étale over A, over which there exists a CM elliptic curve E. Then for any ideal
f Ď OK , the Λ-ring OpErfsq is Λ-normal over A.
Proof. Let S denote the maximal Λ-order over A in K bOK OpErfsq. Then we have
an inclusion OpErfsq Ď S of finite flat A-algebras. Therefore it is an equality if
OKp bA OpErfsq “ OKp bA S for all primes p ∤ t. Thus it is enough to show that
OKp bA OpErfsq is Λp -normal over OKp for all p ∤ t.
  Write f “ pr g, where p ∤ g. Then putting Rp “ OKp bA R, we have
             OKp bA OpErfsq “ OKp bA pOpErpr sq bR OpErgsqq
                               “ pOKp bA OpErpr sqq bRp pOKp bA OpErgsqq
                               “ OpERp rpr sq bRp OpERp rgsq
                                 ź
                               “   OpER1 rpr sq,
                                   R1
         1
where R runs over all irreducible direct factors of the finite étale OKp -algebra
OpERp rgsq. Therefore it is enough to show that each OpER1 rpr sq is Λp -normal over
OKp . But this follows from 11.9.                                                 
Proposition 11.11. Let A “ OK r1{ts, for some t P OK . Put R “ OH r1{ts and
                                                              ˚
assume there exists a CM elliptic curve E over R. Write G “ OK  . Then the
                                                      G
maximal Λ-order in K bA OpLR pfqfl q over A is OpErfsq .
Proof. By lemma 11.10 and part (2) of proposition 2.2, the G-invariant subring
OpErfsqG is Λ-normal over A. Since K bA OpLR pfqfl q “ K bA OpErfsqG , by part
(2) of proposition 11.6, we can conclude that OpErfsqG is the maximal Λ-order over
A in K bA OpLR pfqfl q.                                                         
Theorem 11.12. Let OpLpfqfl q„ denote the maximal Λ-order over OK in K bOK
OpLpfqfl q. Then
   (1) OpLpfqfl q„ is isomorphic as a Λ-ring to the ray class algebra ROK ,P pfq.
   (2) The map
                           OpLpfqfl q f ÝÑ OpLpfqfl q„ f
                          `          ˘    `           ˘

        is an isomorphism of pro-rings.
34                              J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


     (3) If a prime number divides the index rOpLpfqfl q„ : OpLpfqfl qs then it divides
                                      ˚
         the order of the unit group OK .
Proof. (1): Since OpLpfqfl q„ is the maximal Λ-order over OK in K bOK OpLpfqfl q,
and since ROK ,P pfq is that in K bOK ROK ,P pfq, it is enough to show there is an
isomorphism
                                  LpfqpQ̄q – DRP pfq
of IdP -sets, but this is follows immediately from part (2) of proposition 11.3.
   (2): Since the rings
                                     A “ OK rq´1 s
for any two primes q Ă OK form a cover of OK , it is enough to prove the map
of pro-rings is an isomorphism after base change from OK to any two such A. By
Shimura’s theorem ([14], prop. 4.2.2), there are at least two primes q Ă OK such
that there exists a CM elliptic curve over R “ OH bOK A. (In fact, he proves there
are infinitely many.) So fixing A and a CM elliptic curve E over OH bOK A, it is
enough to show that
                        ´                 ¯     ´                  ¯
(11.12.37)               A bOK OpLpfqfl q ÝÑ A bOK OpLpfqfl q„
                                               f                        f

is an isomorphism of pro-rings.
   But we also have
                  A bOK OpLpfqfl q “ R bOH OpLpfqfl q “ OpLR pfqfl q
and hence by part (1) of proposition 2.2
                          OpLR pfqfl q„ “ A bOK OpLpfqfl q„ .
Therefore (11.12.37) can be rewritten as
                        ´             ¯  ´             ¯
(11.12.38)                OpLR pfqfl q ÝÑ OpLR pfqfl q„ .
                                       f                       f

We know further that the map
                              OpLR pfqfl q„ ÝÑ OpErfsqG
is an isomorphism by 11.11. So the map (11.12.38) can in turn be rewritten as
                        ´             ¯  ´          ¯
(11.12.39)                OpLR pfqfl q ÝÑ OpErfsqG ,
                                           f               f

and this is an isomorphism of pro-rings by 11.8.
   (3): It is enough to show these properties locally on OK . So as above, it is
enough to show them after base change to A “ OK rq´1 s, where q is a prime of OK
such that there is a CM elliptic curve E over R “ OH bOK A.
   Then the map A bOK OpLR pfqfl q Ñ A bOK OpLR pfqfl q„ is identified with
                              OpLR pfqfl q ÝÑ OpErfsqG .
By part (2) of proposition 11.6, the image of this map is of finite index divisible
                                          ˚
only by the primes dividing the order of OK .                                    

                              12. Further questions
   Is it possible to use Λ-schemes of finite type to generate other large abelian
extensions, beyond the Kroneckerian explicit class field theories? We will formulate
a range of such questions in this section, some of which it is reasonable to hope
have a positive answer and some which are more ambitious.
   EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                35


12.1. Λ-geometric field extensions. So far, we have mostly been interested in what
in the introduction we called Λ-refinements of explicit class field theories—that is,
in generating ray class algebras instead of abelian field extensions. But hungry for
positive answers, we will give weaker, field-theoretic formulations here.
   Let K be a number field, and write
                     Λ “ ΛOK ,MK     and Rpfq “ ROK ,MK pfq.
For any separated Λ-scheme X of finite type over OK , consider the extension of K
obtained by adjoining the coordinates of the f-periodic points, for all cycles f:
                                     ď
                            KpXq :“      KpXpfqpK̄qq.
                                        f

For instance, we have the following:
     (1) If K “ Q and X is Gm withŤthe toric Λ-structure, then Then KpXq is the
          maximal abelian extension n Qpζn q.
     (2) If K “ Q and X “ A1 with the Chebyshev    Ť Λ-structure, then KpXq is the
          maximal totally real abelian extension n Qpζn ` ζn´1 q.
     (3) K is imaginary quadratic, X is P1OH with the Lattès Λ-structure. Then
          KpXq is the maximal abelian extension of K.
     (4) If K is general and X “ Spec Rpfq, then KpXq is the ray class field Kpfq.
     (5) KpX1 > X2 q is the compositum KpX1 qKpX2 q
    Let us say that an abelian extension L{K is Λ-geometric if there exists an X as
above such that L Ď KpXq. First observe that any finite extension of a Λ-geometric
extension is Λ-geometric, by (4) and (5) above. Therefore there is no maximal Λ-
geometric extension unless, as in the examples above, the maximal abelian extension
itself is Λ-geometric.
   (Q4) Are there number fields other than Q and imaginary quadratic fields for
          which the maximal abelian extension is Λ-geometric?
    It is natural to consider Shimura’s generalization of Kronecker’s theory to CM
fields and abelian varieties. We expect that it can be realized in our framework, or
at least that some version of it. But note that, assuming rK : Qs ą 2, the maximal
abelian extension generated by Shimura’s method is an infinite subextension of the
maximal abelian extension itself—the relative Galois group is an infinite group of
exponent 2. (See [20][18][22].)
   (Q5) Let K be a CM field of degree greater than 2. Is Shimura’s extension Λ-
          geometric? If so, is there an infinite extension of it which is Λ-geometric?

12.2. Production of Λ-schemes from ray class algebras. It appears difficult to find
Λ-schemes of finite type which generate large infinite abelian extensions. Every
example we know ultimately comes from varieties with complex multiplication.
Here we will consider an alternative—the possibility of manufacturing Λ-schemes
of finite type by interpolating the ray class schemes SpecpRpfqq, in the way that
Gm can be viewed as interpolating the µn as n varies. This raises some questions
which have the flavor of algebraic number theory more than the geometric questions
above, and hence have a special appeal.
   Let r be a product of real places of K, and let X a reduced Λ-scheme of finite
type over OK . Assume further that the union
                                      ď
                                           Xpfq
                                    fPZpP,rq

of the closed subschemes Xpfq is Zariski dense in X. If it is not, replace X with the
closure. Then all the information needed to construct X is in principle available
36                                 J. BORGER, B. DE SMIT


inside the function algebra of
                                     colimfPZpP,rq Xpfq.
To be sure, this ind-scheme and X are quite far apart, much as an abelian variety
and its p-divisible groups are. But pressing on, if X satisfies the property in (Q2)
in the introduction, then this colimit would be isomorphic to
                                          `          ˘
                             colimfPZpP,rq Spec Rpfq ,
and so all the information need to construct X is in principle available in projective
limit
                                Rrrs “ lim Rpfq,
                                              fPZpP,rq
which can be viewed as a construction purely in the world of algebraic number
theory in that it depends only on K and r and not on any variety X.
   For example in the cyclotomic context, where K “ Q and r “ 8, the injective
map
                       Zrx˘1 s ÝÑ lim Zrxs{pxn ´ 1q “ Rr8s
                                         n
realizes the function algebra of Gm as a dense finitely generated sub-Λ-ring of Rr8s .
    We can ask whether similar subrings exist for general K:
   (Q6) Does Rrrs have a dense sub-OK -algebra which is finitely generated as an
         OK -algebra? Does it have a dense sub-Λ-ring which is finitely generated as
         an OK -algebra?
It might be possible to cook up such a subring purely algebraically, instead of going
through geometry.
12.3. The cotangent space. One first step in finding such a subring might be to
guess its dimension by looking at the cotangent space of the ray class algebras at
a point modulo p. For example, the cotangent space of µpn modulo p at the origin
is 1-dimensional, at least if n ě 1.
   For any ideal a P IdMK (and r still a product of real places), let Ia denote the
kernel of the morphism
                                         aψ
(12.3.40)                         Rpraq ÝÑ Rprq “ OKprq .
So we have an exact sequence
                                                   ψa
                            0 ÝÑ Ia ÝÑ Rpraq ÝÑ OKprq ÝÑ 0.
Therefore Ia {Ia2 is naturally an OKprq -module. It is finitely generated since Rpraq
is noetherian, being finite over Z.
   (Q7) Given a maximal ideal q Ă OKprq with residue field k, is the dimension
                                   dimk pk bOKprq Ia {Ia2 q
         constant for large a?
If so, can it be expressed in terms of the classical algebraic number theoretic in-
variants of K? One might hope it is the number of places of K at infinity.

                                        References
 [1] Théorie des intersections et théorème de Riemann-Roch. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol.
     225. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1971. Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique du Bois-
     Marie 1966–1967 (SGA 6), Dirigé par P. Berthelot, A. Grothendieck et L. Illusie. Avec la
     collaboration de D. Ferrand, J. P. Jouanolou, O. Jussila, S. Kleiman, M. Raynaud et J. P.
     Serre.
 [2] Stacks Project. http://stacks.math.columbia.edu, 2017.
 [3] James Borger. Basic geometry of Witt vectors, I: The affine case. arXiv:0801.1691v5.
 [4] James Borger. Basic geometry of Witt vectors, II: Spaces. arXiv:1006.0092v1.
    EXPLICIT CLASS FIELD THEORY AND THE ALGEBRAIC GEOMETRY OF Λ-RINGS                             37


 [5] James Borger. Λ-rings and the field with one element. arXiv:0906.3146v1.
 [6] James Borger and Bart de Smit. Lambda actions of rings of integers. arXiv:1105.4662.
 [7] James Borger and Bart de Smit. Galois theory and integral models of Λ-rings. Bull. Lond.
     Math. Soc., 40(3):439–446, 2008.
 [8] James Borger and Ben Wieland. Plethystic algebra. Adv. Math., 194(2):246–283, 2005.
 [9] F. J. B. J. Clauwens. Commuting polynomials and λ-ring structures on Zrxs. J. Pure Appl.
     Algebra, 95(3):261–269, 1994.
[10] A. A. Davydov. Periodic λ-rings and periods of finite groups. Mat. Sb., 188(8):75–82, 1997.
[11] Pierre Deligne and Kenneth A. Ribet. Values of abelian L-functions at negative integers over
     totally real fields. Invent. Math., 59(3):227–286, 1980.
[12] Jesse Elliott. Binomial rings, integer-valued polynomials, and λ-rings. J. Pure Appl. Algebra,
     207(1):165–185, 2006.
[13] Alexander Grothendieck. Éléments de géométrie algébrique. IV. Étude locale des schémas et
     des morphismes de schémas. III. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math., (28):255, 1966.
[14] Lance Gurney. Elliptic curves with complex multiplication and Λ-structures. PhD thesis,
     Australian National University, 2015.
[15] André Joyal. δ-anneaux et λ-anneaux. C. R. Math. Rep. Acad. Sci. Canada, 7(4):227–232,
     1985.
[16] Gérard Laumon and Laurent Moret-Bailly. Champs algébriques, volume 39 of Ergebnisse der
     Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete. 3. Folge. A Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics
     [Results in Mathematics and Related Areas. 3rd Series. A Series of Modern Surveys in
     Mathematics]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2000.
[17] John Milnor. Dynamics in one complex variable, volume 160 of Annals of Mathematics Stud-
     ies. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, third edition, 2006.
[18] A. I. Ovseeviˇ c. Abelian extensions of fields of CM type. Funkcional. Anal. i Priložen.,
     8(1):16–24, 1974.
[19] J.-P. Serre. Complex multiplication. In Algebraic Number Theory (Proc. Instructional Conf.,
     Brighton, 1965), pages 292–296. Thompson, Washington, D.C., 1967.
[20] Goro Shimura. On the class-fields obtained by complex multiplication of abelian varieties.
     Osaka Math. J., 14:33–44, 1962.
[21] Takeo Uramoto. Semi-galois Categories II: An arithmetic analogue of Christol’s theorem.
     arXiv:1710.01021v3.
[22] Wafa Wei. Moduli fields of CM-motives applied to Hilbert’s 12-th problem.
     http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.57.5573.
[23] Clarence Wilkerson. Lambda-rings, binomial domains, and vector bundles over CP p8q.
     Comm. Algebra, 10(3):311–328, 1982.
[24] Bora Yalkinoglu. On arithmetic models and functoriality of Bost-Connes systems. With an
     appendix by Sergey Neshveyev. Invent. Math., 191(2):383–425, 2013.
    E-mail address: james.borger@anu.edu.au, desmit@math.leidenuniv.nl
