                                                     THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I
                                                                THE AFFINE CASE

                                                                                     JAMES BORGER


                                                   Abstract. We give a concrete description of the category of étale algebras




arXiv:0801.1691v6 [math.AG] 14 Dec 2015
                                                   over the ring of Witt vectors of a given finite length with entries in an arbitrary
                                                   ring. We do this not only for the classical p-typical and big Witt vector functors
                                                   but also for certain analogues over arbitrary local and global fields. The basic
                                                   theory of these generalized Witt vectors is developed from the point of view
                                                   of commuting Frobenius lifts and their universal properties, which is a new
                                                   approach even for the classical Witt vectors. The larger purpose of this paper
                                                   is to provide the affine foundations for the algebraic geometry of generalized
                                                   Witt schemes and arithmetic jet spaces. So the basics here are developed
                                                   somewhat fully, with an eye toward future applications.




                                                                                     Introduction
                                             Witt vector functors are certain functors from the category of (commutative)
                                          rings to itself. The most common are the p-typical Witt vector functors W , for
                                          each prime number p. Given a ring A, one traditionally defines W (A) as a set to
                                          be AN and then gives it the unique ring structure which is functorial in A and such
                                          that the set maps
                                                                             w
                                                                   W (A) −→ AN
                                                                                                         2
                                                            (x0 , x1 , . . .) 7→ hx0 , xp0 + px1 , xp0 + pxp1 + p2 x2 , . . .i
                                          are ring homomorphisms for all rings A, where the target has the ring structure
                                          with componentwise operations. For example, we have
                                                                                                              p−1
                                                                                                              X 1 p
                                                 (x0 , x1 , . . .) + (y0 , y1 , . . .) = (x0 + y0 , x1 + y1 −         xi0 y0p−i , . . .)
                                                                                                              i=1
                                                                                                                  p i
                                                  (x0 , x1 , . . .) · (y0 , y1 , . . .) = (x0 y0 , xp0 y1 + x1 y0p + px1 y1 , . . .).


                                          Observe that the four polynomials in x0 , y0 , x1 , y1 displayed on the right-hand side
                                          have integer coefficients, as they must if they are to define operations on W (A) for
                                          all rings A. Conversely, to prove that the desired functorial ring structure on W
                                          exists, it is enough to prove that the polynomials sitting in the higher components
                                          have integer coefficients too. This is Witt’s theorem.
                                             On the other hand, the polynomials at the component of index n depend only
                                          on the variables x0 , y0 , . . . , xn , yn . This is clear by induction. It follows that the
                                          quotient set A[0,n] = {(x0 , . . . , xn )} of W (A) = AN is a quotient ring, which we
                                          denote by Wn (A). (It is traditionally denoted Wn+1 (A). The shift in indexing is
                                          preferable for reasons discussed in 2.5.)

                                             Date: October 22, 2018. 17:40.
                                             Mathematics Subject Classification (2010): 13F35.
                                             This work was partly supported by Discovery Project DP0773301, a grant from the Australian
                                          Research Council.
                                                                                               1
2                                     J. BORGER


    In some cases, the rings W (A) and Wn (A) are isomorphic to familiar rings. For
example, W (Z/pZ) is isomorphic to the ring Zp of p-adic integers, and Wn (Z/pZ)
is isomorphic to Z/pn+1 Z. If p is invertible in A, then w is a bijection and so the
Witt vector rings become product rings: Wn (A) ∼      = A[0,n] and W (A) ∼
                                                                         = AN . But in
most cases, W (A) is not a familiar ring.
    While this traditional approach to Witt vectors is adequate for many purposes,
it has two shortcomings. The first is that it is not clear how we should think about
the affine scheme Spec Wn (A) geometrically. Indeed, I am not aware of a truly
geometric description of Spec Wn (A) in any nontrivial case in the literature. If we
want to fully incorporate Witt vectors into arithmetic algebraic geometry (and we
do), it is important to have a thorough understanding of their geometry. The main
point here and in the following paper [4] is to set up a framework for that. The
geometry in this paper is however limited to the basic results in the affine case
needed for the general treatment in [4].
    The second shortcoming of the traditional approach is that it does not explain
what the defining purpose of Witt vectors is. The answer, at least for this paper, is
that they control Frobenius lifts—ring endomorphisms which reduce to the Frobe-
nius map modulo p. Here we are following Borger–Wieland [5], 12.3–4, which in
turn followed Joyal [18][19]. Motivated by this perspective, we will define Witt vec-
tor functors relative to primes in any global or local field. This generality includes
not only the p-typical functors above but also the so-called big Witt vector functor
and less common variants of the p-typical ones due to Drinfeld and to Hazewinkel
([10], Proposition 1.1; [16], (18.6.13)). It also includes many variants unstudied till
now. We will work with these generalized functors throughout the paper. In fact,
this will take no more effort once we establish some basic reduction results.
  Let us now discuss the contents in more detail.
  Section 1 introduces our generalized Witt vectors. Given a Dedekind domain R
and a set E of maximal ideals of R with finite residue fields, we will define a functor
WR,E from the category RingR of R-algebras to itself:
                               WR,E : RingR → RingR .
(In fact, we will work with slightly more general R and E.) We call WR,E the E-
typical Witt vector functor. When R = Z and E consists of a single maximal ideal
pZ, our functor will agree with the p-typical Witt vector functor above; when E
consists of all maximal ideals of Z, our functor will agree with the big Witt vector
functor. The definition of WR,E is in two steps. First we define a functor
                                fl
                               WR,E : RingflR → RingflR ,

where RingflR is the full subcategory of RingR consisting of R-algebras which are
m-torsion free for all ideals m ∈ E. We call such algebras E-flat. Then we define
                                              fl
WR,E to be a certain natural extension of WR,E     to all of RingR .
   Let N(E) denote the commutative monoid E N, where N is {0, 1, . . .} under
                                                 L

addition. Given an action of N(E) on an R-algebra B, let ψm denote the endomor-
phism of B given by the m-th element of the standard basis of N(E) . Let us say
that such an action is a ΛR,E -structure if for each m ∈ E, the map ψm reduces
to the Frobenius endomorphism x 7→ x[R:m] on B/mB. Now, for any R-algebra A,
                              (E)
the monoid N(E) acts on AN through its translation action on itself in the expo-
                                     fl
nent. When A is E-flat, we define WR,E   (A) to be the largest of the sub-R-algebras
         (E)
B ⊆ AN      having the properties that B is stable under the action of N(E) and
that the induced action on B is a ΛR,E -structure. It is elementary to check that a
                            fl
maximal such subalgebra WR,E   (A) exists.
                      THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                               3


    This definition can be expressed as a universal property. Let RingflΛR,E denote
the following category: the objects are E-flat R-algebras equipped with a ΛR,E -
structure, and the morphisms are N(E) -equivariant R-algebra maps. Then WR,E           fl
                                                                                           ,
                              fl       fl
viewed as a functor RingR → RingΛR,E , is the right adjoint of the evident forgetful
functor.
                                                                     fl
    One then defines WR,E to be the left Kan extension of WR,E            , now viewed as a
              fl
functor RingR → RingR . This amounts to the following. It is not hard to show that
                 fl
the functor WR,E     is representable, that is, there exists an E-flat R-algebra ΛR,E and
                       fl                                                               fl
an isomorphism WR,E         (−) = Hom(ΛR,E , −), as set-valued functors. Because WR,E
takes values in R-algebras, ΛR,E carries the structure of a co-R-algebra object in
RingflR . Because such a structure is described using maps between certain coproducts
of ΛR,E with itself, and because RingflR is a full subcategory of RingR closed under
coproducts, ΛR,E continues to be a co-R-algebra object when viewed as an object
of RingR . Therefore it represents an R-algebra-valued functor, and this functor is
what WR,E is defined to be.
                                                     fl
    Since the definition of WR,E in terms of WR,E        is of a purely category-theoretic
nature, one should view the E-flat case as the central one. This is in contrast to
the common point of view that the purpose of Witt vector functors is to lift rings
from positive characteristic to characteristic zero.
    As in the E-flat setting, WR,E is the right adjoint of the forgetful functor
RingΛR,E → RingR , but to make sense of this, it is necessary to know the what
a ΛR,E -structure on a general R-algebra is. Unfortunately, it is not easy to state
the definition, and so we will leave it to the body of the paper. In the E-flat setting,
it is equivalent to a commuting family of Frobenius lifts indexed by E, as above;
but in general, it is a slightly stronger structure that is better behaved. When R
is Z and E consists of all maximal ideals of Z, a ΛR,E -structure is equivalent to
a λ-ring structure in the sense of Grothendieck’s Riemann–Roch theory, but this
does not admit a simple definition either.
    In addition to the right adjoint WR,E , the forgetful functor RingΛR,E → RingR
has a left adjoint, which we denote by A 7→ ΛR,E ⊙ A. It has a smaller presence
in this paper, but it is very important—even in the p-typical case, as the work of
Buium [7][8] makes clear.
    Section 2 defines functors WR,E,n , which are truncations of WR,E in the same
way that the functors Wn above are truncations of W . For any A ∈ RingflR and
n ∈ N(E) , let WR,E,n
                    fl
                           (A) denote the image of the subring WR,E    fl
                                                                           (A) ⊆ AN under
the canonical projection
                                          (E)
                                       AN → A[0,n] ,
where
                        [0, n] = {i ∈ N(E) | im ⩽ nm for all m ∈ E}.
         fl
Then WR,E,n   is a functor RingflR → RingflR . It is representable by an E-flat R-algebra
ΛR,E,n , and we extend it to a functor
                                WR,E,n : RingR → RingR
by taking its left Kan extension, as above. These truncated functors are related to
the original one by the formula
                              WR,E (A) = lim WR,E,n (A).
                                             n
   Even in the p-typical case, this approach to defining the Witt vectors has the
advantage over the traditional one that universal properties are emphasized and
the particulars of explicit constructions are played down. But this comes at a cost.
For instance, it is not obvious that WR,E,n preserves surjectivity of maps. To prove
4                                             J. BORGER


this and other basic facts, it appears necessary to bring back the Witt components
(x0 , x1 , . . .) above, at least in some form. To define them, the ideals of E must be
principal; the purpose of section 3 is to define them in the minimal case we will
need, which is when E consists of a single principal ideal m. A version of the proof
of Witt’s theorem then shows there is a unique functorial bijection AN → WR,E (A)
such that when A is E-flat, the composition AN → WR,E (A) ⊆ AN satisfies
                                                                2
              (x0 , x1 , x2 , . . .) 7→ hx0 , xq0 + πx1 , xq0 + πxq1 + π 2 x2 , . . .i
where q = [R : m] and π is a fixed generator of m. We can similarly identify
WR,E,n (A) with the quotient A[0,n] consisting of vectors (x0 , . . . , xn ). Let me em-
phasize that the components (x0 , x1 , . . .) depend on the choice of generator π ∈ m
in a complex, non-multilinear way. But we can use them to define Verschiebung
operators
                    Vmj : mj ⊗R WR,E,n (A) −→ WR,E,n+j (A)
                           π j ⊗ (x0 , . . . , xn ) 7→ (0, . . . , 0, x0 , . . . , xn ),
which are independent of the choice of the generator π. Making that so is the
purpose the tensor factor mj .
   When E consists of a single ideal m (possibly nonprincipal), section 4 describes
WR,E,n in terms of the case where m is principal, which is covered by section 3.
This is done by working Zariski locally on R. Using the same technique, we will
show that the Verschiebung maps as above can be defined when m is not assumed to
be principal. In fact, there is a unique functorial family of such maps agreeing with
the maps defined above. The image of Vmj is the kernel of the canonical projection
WR,E,n+j (A) → WR,E,j (A).
   Similarly, section 5 gives a description of WR,E,n when E is general in terms
of the case where E consists of a single ideal, which is covered by section 4: if
m1 , . . . , mr are the ideals in the support of n, then there is a natural isomorphism
                                    ∼
(0.0.1)                 WR,E,n −→ WR,mr ,nmr ◦ · · · ◦ WR,m1 ,nm1 .
Such a description also holds for WR,E , though some care must be taken when E is
infinite. It is also possible to describe the functor ΛR,E ⊙ −, as well as its truncated
variants ΛR,E,n ⊙ −, in terms of the case where E consists of a single ideal.
   Section 6 gives several ring-theoretic facts about WR,E,n which we will need later.
For example, this is where we prove that WR,E,n preserves surjectivity. Most of the
arguments there appear to require the use of Witt components and the reduction
techniques of sections 4 and 5.

  Sections 7–9 prove the main results, which relate Witt vector functors and étale
maps. Suppose E consists of a single ideal m. For any ring A and any integer n ⩾ 1,
we have a diagram
                                                                      s◦pr1
                                   αn
                                                                              / A/mn A.
                                         / WR,E,n−1 (A) × A                    /
(0.0.2)          WR,E,n (A)
                                                                      t◦pr2

When m is principal, the maps αn , s, and t can be defined in terms of the Witt
components relative to a fixed generator π ∈ m as follows:
                                                             n      n−1
         αn : (a0 , . . . , an ) 7→ (a0 , . . . , an−1 ), aq0 + πa1q    . . . + π n an
                                                                                       
                                          n
           s : (a0 , . . . , an−1 ) 7→ (aq0 + . . . + π n−1 aqn−1 ) mod mn A
                           t : a 7→ a mod mn A.
If A is m-torsion free, (0.0.2) is an equalizer diagram. Figure 1 shows the induced
diagram of schemes in the p-typical case when n = 1.
                    THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                               5




                                                                Frobenius




                                                                identity




         Spec W1 (A)                 Spec(A × A)                            Spec A/pA

        Figure 1. As a topological space, Spec W1 (A) (traditionally de-
        noted W2 (A)) is two copies of Spec A glued along Spec A/pA. This
        is also true as schemes if we assume that A is p-torsion free and we
        glue transversely and with a Frobenius twist, as indicated. There
        is a similar description of Spec Wn (A) as Spec Wn−1 (A) glued with
        Spec A along Spec A/pn A. See the diagram (0.0.2).

  Now let C denote the following category: an object is a pair (B, ϕ), where B is
an étale (WR,E,n−1 (A) × A)-algebra and ϕ is an isomorphism of A/mn A-algebras
                                                ϕ
                       A/mn A ⊗t◦pr2 B −→ A/mn A ⊗s◦pr1 B
and where a morphism (B1 , ϕ1 ) → (B2 , ϕ2 ) is a (WR,E,n−1 (A) × A)-algebra map
f : B1 → B2 such that
                 ϕ2 ◦ (A/mn A ⊗t◦pr2 f ) = (A/mn A ⊗s◦pr1 f ) ◦ ϕ1 .
In other words, C is the category of algebras equipped with gluing data relative to
the diagram (0.0.2), or equivalently C is the (weak) fiber product of the category
of étale Wn−1 (A)-algebras and the category étale A-algebras over the category of
étale A/mn A-algebras via the evident functors.
Theorem A. The base-change functor from the category of étale WR,E,n (A)-algebras
to C is an equivalence. If A is m-torsion free, then a quasi-inverse is given by send-
ing (B, ϕ) to the equalizer of the two maps
                                1⊗idB
                                           /
                          B                    / A/mn A ⊗s◦pr1 B.
                              ϕ◦(1⊗idB )

   The first statement can be expressed succinctly in geometric terms; it says that
the map αn satisfies effective descent for étale algebras and that descent data is
equivalent to gluing data with respect to the diagram (0.0.2). Using theorem A and
induction on n, it is in principle possible to reduce questions about étale Wn (A)-
algebras to questions about étale A-algebras. This is still true when E consists of
more than one ideal, but now by (0.0.1) and induction on r.
   Section 9 generalizes van der Kallen’s theorem [24], (2.4), to arbitrary R and E:
Theorem B. Let f : A → B be an étale morphism of R-algebras. Then the map
WR,E,n (f ) : WR,E,n (A) → WR,E,n (B) of R-algebras is étale.
   This theorem is fundamental in extending Witt constructions beyond affine
schemes and will be used often in [4]. Van der Kallen’s argument, which has an
6                                    J. BORGER


infinitesimal flavor, could be extended to our setting with only minor modifications.
Instead we deduce theorem B from theorem A, and so our argument has a glob-
ally geometric flavor. (Note that, until recently, van der Kallen’s paper [24] had
escaped the notice of many workers in de Rham–Witt theory, to whom theorem B
was unknown even for the p-typical Witt vectors.)
   Last, I would like to thank Amnon Neeman for helpful discussions on some
technical points and Lance Gurney for some comments on earlier versions of this
paper.



                                     Contents
    Introduction                                                                    1
    1. Generalized Witt vectors and Λ-rings                                         6
    2. Grading and truncations                                                     16
    3. Principal single-prime case                                                 19
    4. General single-prime case                                                   22
    5. Multiple-prime case                                                         25
    6. Basic affine properties                                                     26
    7. Some general descent                                                        29
    8. Ghost descent in the single-prime case                                      35
    9. W and étale morphisms                                                      38
    References                                                                     41




                 1. Generalized Witt vectors and Λ-rings
   The purpose of this section is to define our generalized Witt vectors and Λ-rings.
It is largely an expansion in more concrete terms of Borger–Wieland [5], or rather
of the parts about Witt vectors and Λ-rings. The approach here will allow us to
avoid much of the abstract language of operations on rings, as first introduced in
Tall–Wraith [23].
   For the traditional way of defining Λ-rings and Witt vectors, see §1 of chapter
IX of Bourbaki [6] and especially the exercises for that section. One can also see
Witt’s original paper [26] on the p-typical Witt vectors (reprinted in [27]) and his
notes on the big Witt vectors [27], pp. 157–163.

1.1. Supramaximal ideals. Let us say that an ideal m of a ring R is supramaximal
if either
    (a) R/m is a finite field, Rm is a discrete valuation ring, and m is finitely pre-
        sented as an R-module, or
    (b) m is the unit ideal.
By far the most important example is a maximal ideal with finite residue field in a
Dedekind domain. (In fact, all phenomena in this paper occur already over R = Z,
and this case covers the classical Witt vectors and λ-rings.) The reason we allow
the unit ideal is only so that a supramaximal ideal remains supramaximal after any
localization.
   Note that a supramaximal ideal m is invertible as an R-module. Indeed, locally
at m it is the maximal ideal of a discrete valuation ring, and away from m it is the
unit ideal.
                       THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                         7


1.2. General notation. Fix a ring R and a family (mα )α∈E of pairwise coprime
supramaximal ideals of R indexed by a set E. Note that because the unit ideal is
coprime to itself, it can be repeated any number of times; otherwise the ideals mα
are distinct. For each α ∈ E, let qα denote the cardinality of R/mα . We will often
abusively speak of mα rather than α as being an element of E, especially when mα
is maximal, in which case it comes from a unique α ∈ E.
   Let R[1/E] denote the R-algebra whose spectrum is the complement of E in
Spec R. It is the universal R-algebra in which every mα becomes the unit ideal. It
also has the more concrete description
                                         O
                               R[1/E] =     R[1/mα],
                                           α∈E

where the tensor product is over R and R[1/mα ] is defined to be the coequalizer of
the maps
                                         / Sym(m−1
                                          /
                             Sym(R)               α )

of symmetric algebras, where m−1α is the dual of mα , one of the maps is Sym applied
to the canonical map R → m−1 α  , and the other is the map induced by the R-module
map R → Sym(m−1   α ) that sends  1 ∈ R to the element 1 ∈ Sym(m−1  α ) in degree zero.
   Finally, we write N for the monoid {0, 1, 2, . . .} under addition and write RingR
for the category of R-algebras.
1.3. E-flat R-modules. Let us say that an R-module M is E-flat if for all maximal
ideals m in E, the following equivalent conditions are satisfied:
    (a) Rm ⊗R M is a flat Rm -module,
   (b) the map m ⊗R M → M is injective.
The equivalence of these two can be seen as follows. Condition (b) is equivalent to
the statement TorR1 (R/m, M ) = 0, which is equivalent to

                             TorR
                                1 (R/m, Rm ⊗R M ) = 0.
                                  m



Since Rm is a discrete valuation ring, this is equivalent to the Rm -module Rm ⊗R M
being torsion free and hence flat.
   We say an R-algebra is E-flat if its underlying R-module is. Let RingflR denote
the full subcategory of RingR consisting of the E-flat R-algebras.
1.4. Proposition. Any product of E-flat R-modules is E-flat, and any sub-R-
module of an E-flat R-module is E-flat.
Proof. We will use condition (b) above. Let (Mi )i∈I be a family of E-flat R-modules.
We want to show that for each maximal ideal m in E, the composition
                         Q
                     m ⊗ i Mi         / Q m ⊗ Mi         / Q Mi
                                         i                  i

is injective. Because each Mi is E-flat, the right-hand map is injective, and so it is
enough to show the left-hand map is injective.
    Since m is assumed to be finitely presented as an R-module, we can express it as
a cokernel of a map N ′ → N of finite free R-modules. Then we have the following
diagram with exact rows
            N ′ ⊗R i Mi
                   Q            / N ⊗R Q Mi         / m ⊗R Q Mi        /0
                                          i                 i

                   ∼                   ∼
           Q ′                       
                                / Q N ⊗R Mi
                                                          
                                                    / Q m ⊗R Mi         / 0.
            i N ⊗R Mi              i                   i

The left two vertical maps are isomorphisms because N ′ and N are finite free.
Therefore the rightmost vertical map is an injection (and even an isomorphism).
8                                        J. BORGER


   Now suppose M ′ is a sub-R-module of an E-flat R-module M . Since m is an
invertible R-module, m ⊗R M ′ maps injectively to m ⊗R M . Since M is E-flat,
m ⊗R M ′ further maps injectively to M , and hence to M ′ .                
1.5. Ψ-rings. Let A be an R-algebra. Let us define a ΨR,E -action, or a ΨR,E -ring
structure, on A to be a commuting family of R-algebra endomorphisms     ψα indexed
by α ∈ E. This is the same as an action of the monoid N(E) = E N on A. For
                                                                  L

any element n ∈ N(E) , we will also write ψn for the endomorphism of A induced
by n. A morphism of ΨR,E -rings is defined to be an N(E) -equivariant morphism of
rings.
                                                              (E)
   The free ΨR,E -ring on one generator e is ΨR,E = R[e]⊗R N , where N(E) acts
on ΨR,E through its action on itself in the exponent. In particular, ΨR,E is freely
generated as an R-algebra by the elements ψn (e), where n ∈ N(E) . Then it is
natural to write ψn = ψn (e) ∈ ΨR,E and ψα = ψbα ∈ ΨR,E , where bα ∈ N(E)
denotes the α-th standard basis vector, and e = ψ0 ∈ ΨR,E for the identity operator.
   For any ΨR,E -ring A, there is a unique set map
                                                    ◦
(1.5.1)                               ΨR,E × A −→ A
with the property that for all α ∈ E, r ∈ R, f1 , f2 ∈ ΨR,E , a ∈ A we have
(1.5.2)                               ψα ◦ a = ψα (a)
and
(1.5.3)    r ◦ a = r,   (f1 + f2 ) ◦ a = (f1 ◦ a) + (f2 ◦ a),   (f1 f2 ) ◦ a = (f1 ◦ a)(f2 ◦ a).
Taking A = ΨR,E , we get a binary operation ◦ on ΨR,E called composition or
plethysm. One can check that this makes ΨR,E a monoid (noncommutative unless
R = 0) with identity e and that (1.5.1) is a monoid action.
   In the language of plethystic algebra [5], we can interpret ΨR,E as the free R-
plethory Rhψα |α ∈ Ei on the R-algebra endomorphisms ψα . Then a ΨR,E -action
in the sense above is the same as a ΨR,E -action in the sense of abstract plethystic
algebra. In particular, ΨR,E can be viewed as the ring of natural unary opera-
tions on ΨR,E -rings, and the composition operation ◦ above agrees with the usual
composition of unary operations. (Compare with 1.18 below)
1.6. E-flat Λ-rings. Let A be an R-algebra which is E-flat. Define a ΛR,E -action,
or a ΛR,E -ring structure, on A to be a ΨR,E -action with the following Frobenius lift
property: for all α ∈ E, the endomorphism id ⊗ ψα of R/mα ⊗R A agrees with the
Frobenius map x 7→ xqα . A morphism of E-flat ΛR,E -rings is simply defined to be
a morphism of the underlying ΨR,E -rings. Let us denote this category by RingflΛR,E .
1.7. The ghost ring. Since an action of ΨR,E on an R-algebra A is the same as
an action (in the category of R-algebras) of the monoid N(E) , the forgetful functor
from the category of ΨR,E -rings to that of R-algebras has a right adjoint given by
                                     Y           (E)
                               A 7→      A = AN ,
                                         N(E)
          (E)            N(E)
where N      acts on A      through its action on itself in the exponent. (This is a
                                                                                 (E)
general fact about monoid actions in any category with products.) For a ∈ AN
and n, n′ ∈ N(E) , the n-th component of ψn′ (a) is the (n + n′ )-th component of a.
                      (E)
   One might call AN the cofree ΨR,E -ring on the R-algebra A. It has tradition-
ally been called the ring of ghost components or ghost vectors. By 1.4, it is E-flat
if A is.
   When |E| = 1, there is the possibility of confusing the ghost ring AN , which
has the product ring structure, with the usual ring AN of Witt components (see
                    THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                            9


3.5), which has an exotic ring structure. To prevent this, we will use angle brackets
ha0 , a1 , . . .i for elements of the ghost ring.
                                                                       fl
1.8. Witt vectors of E-flat rings. Let us now construct the functor WR,E  . We will
show in 1.9 that it is the right adjoint of the forgetful functor from the category
of E-flat ΛR,E -rings to that of E-flat R-algebras. (Further, the flatness will be
removed in 1.12.)
                                                                            (E)
   Let A be a E-flat R-algebra. Let U0 (A) denote the cofree ΨR,E -ring AN . For
any i ⩾ 0, let
          Ui+1 (A) = {b ∈ Ui (A) | ψα (b) − bqα ∈ mα Ui (A) for all α ∈ E}.
                                 (E)
This is a sub-R-algebra of AN . Indeed, it is the intersection over α ∈ E of the
equalizers of pairs of R-algebra maps
                                      /
                            Ui (A)      / R/mα ⊗R Ui (A)
given by x 7→ 1 ⊗ ψα (x) and by x 7→ (1 ⊗ x)qα .
   Now define
                                           \
                                fl
(1.8.1)                       WR,E  (A) =     Ui (A).
                                                  i⩾0

This is the ring of E-typical Witt vectors with entries in A. It is a sub-R-algebra
      (E)                               (E)
                           fl
of AN . Observe that WR,E     (A) = AN      if A is an R[1/E]-algebra.
                                                                     (E)
                               fl
1.9. Proposition.       (a) WR,E  (A) is a sub-ΨR,E -ring of AN .
                                         fl
   (b) This ΨR,E -ring structure on WR,E    (A) is a ΛR,E -ring structure.
                                      fl
   (c) The induced functor A 7→ WR,E (A) from E-flat R-algebras to E-flat ΛR,E -
       rings is the right adjoint of the forgetful functor.
Proof. (a): Let us first show by induction that each Ui (A) is a sub-ΨR,E -ring of
   (E)                                     (E)
AN . For i = 0, we have U0 (A) = AN , and so it is clear. For i ⩾ 1, we use
the description of Ui+1 (A) as the intersection of the equalizers of the pairs of ring
maps
                                         /
                           Ui (A)       / R/mα ⊗R Ui (A)
given in 1.8. Observe that both these ring maps become ΨR,E -ring maps if we give
R/mα ⊗R Ui (A) a ΨR,E -action by defining ψβ : a ⊗ x 7→ a ⊗ ψβ (x), for all β ∈ E.
Since limits of ΨR,E -rings exist and their underlying rings agree with the limits
                                                                        (E)
taken in the category of rings, Ui+1 (A) is a sub-ΨR,E -ring of AN . Therefore
                                                                            (E)
   fl
WR,E   (A), the intersection of the Ui (A), is also a sub-ΨR,E -ring of AN .
    (b): It is enough to verify
                                                          \
                                           fl
                     ψα (x) − xqα ∈ mα WR,E    (A) = mα     Ui (A),
                                                               i⩾0
                       fl
for all α ∈ E and x ∈ WR,E (A). For any i ⩾ 0, we know
                              ψα (x) − xqα ∈ mα Ui (A),
             fl
because x ∈ WR,E (A) ⊆ Ui+1 (A). Therefore we know
                                        \
                         ψα (x) − xqα ∈    mα Ui (A).
                                                  i⩾0

So, it is enough to show
                                 \                \
(1.9.1)                     mα         Ui (A) =         mα Ui (A).
                                 i⩾0              i⩾0
10                                      J. BORGER


Since mα is finitely generated, it is a quotient of a finite free R-module N . Consider
the induced diagram
                                            h
                     mα ⊗R limi Ui (A)          / limi mα ⊗R Ui (A)
                             O                            O
                                                        g

                                            f
                      N ⊗R limi Ui (A)          / limi N ⊗R Ui (A)

Since N is finite free, f is an isomorphism; since mα is projective, the map N → mα
has a section and hence so does g. Therefore g ◦ f is surjective and hence so is h,
which implies (1.9.1).
   (c): Let A be an E-flat R-algebra, let B be an E-flat ΛR,E -ring, and let γ̄ : B → A
                                                      (E)
be an R-algebra map. By the cofree property of AN , there is a unique ΨR,E -ring
                    (E)
map γ : B → AN          lifting γ̄. We now only need to show that the image of γ is
                 fl
contained in WR,E     (A). By induction, it is enough to show that if im(γ) ⊆ Ui (A),
then im(γ) ⊆ Ui+1 (A).
   Let b be an element of B. Then for each α ∈ E, we have
      ψα γ(b) − γ(b)qα = γ ψα (b) − bqα ∈ γ(mα B) ⊆ mα im(γ) ⊆ mα Ui (A).
                                          

Therefore, by definition of Ui+1 (A), the element γ(b) lies in Ui+1 (A).             

1.10. Exercises. Let R = Z. If E consists of the single ideal pZ, then W fl (Z)
agrees with the subring of the ghost ring ZN consisting of vectors a = ha0 , a1 , . . .i
that satisfy
                               an ≡ an+1 mod pn+1
for all n ⩾ 0. In particular, the elements are p-adic Cauchy sequences and the rule
a 7→ limn→∞ an defines a surjective ring map W fl (Z) → Zp .
   We can go a step further with W fl (Zp ). Let I denote the ideal pZp × p2 Zp × · · ·
                 fl
in ZNp . Then W (Zp ) is isomorphic to the ring Zp ⊕ I with multiplication defined
by the formula (x, y)(x′ , y ′ ) = (xx′ , xy ′ + yx′ + yy ′ ).
   Now suppose that E consists of all the maximal ideals of Z, and identify N(E)
with the set of positive integers, by unique factorization. Then W fl (Z) consists of
the ghost vectors ha1 , a2 , . . .i that satisfy
                               aj ≡ apj mod p1+ordp (j)
for all j ⩾ 1 and all primes p.

1.11. Representing W fl . Let us construct a flat R-algebra ΛR,E representing the
          fl
functor WR,E  . First we will construct objects ΛiR,E representing the functors Ui .
For i = 0, it is clear: U0 is represented by Λ0R,E = ΨR,E . Now assume ΛiR,E has
been constructed and that it is a sub-R-algebra of R[1/E] ⊗R ΨR,E satisfying
                        R[1/E] ⊗R ΛiR,E = R[1/E] ⊗R ΨR,E .
Then let Λi+1                    i
            R,E denote the sub-ΛR,E -algebra of R[1/E] ⊗R ΨR,E generated by all
                          qα                                      i
elements π ⊗ (ψα (f ) − f ), where π ∗ ∈ m−1
            ∗
                                             α ⊆ R[1/E], f ∈ ΛR,E , and α ∈ E.
Then ΛiR,E is flat over R. Indeed, it is E-flat because it is a sub-R-algebra of
R[1/E] ⊗R ΨR,E , and it is flat away from E because R[1/E] ⊗R ΛR,E agrees with
the free R[1/E]-algebra R[1/E] ⊗R ΨR,E . It also clearly represents Ui .
   Finally, we set
                                [
(1.11.1)               ΛR,E =      ΛiR,E ⊆ R[1/E] ⊗R ΨR,E .
                                  i⩾0
                     THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                             11

                                                                                    fl
It is flat over R because it is a colimit of flat R-algebras, and it represents WR,E
because each ΛiR,E represents Ui . As an example, if E = E ′ ∐ E ′′ , where E ′′ con-
sists of only copies of the unit ideal, then ΛR,E agrees with the monoid algebra
            ′′
ΛR,E ′ [N(E ) ]. We will often use the shortened forms ΛE or, when E = {m}, Λm .
   Since ΛR,E represents W fl , which takes values in R-algebras, ΛR,E carries the
structure of a co-R-algebra object in RingflR . Because RingflR is closed under coprod-
ucts (the tensor product of flat modules being flat), a co-ring structure consists in
morphisms

(1.11.2)          ∆+ , ∆× : ΛR,E −→ ΛR,E ⊗R ΛR,E ,               ε+ , ε× : ΛR,E −→ R
corresponding to addition, multiplication, the additive identity, and the multiplica-
                               fl                                 fl
tive identity on the functor WR,E  . The R-linear structure on WR,E   corresponds to
a morphism
                                                Y
(1.11.3)                      β : ΛR,E → RR =       R.
                                                      R

All these structure maps satisfy the opposite of the R-algebra axioms. (In the
language of schemes, one would say this makes Spec ΛR,E an R-algebra scheme
over R; or in the language of [5], it makes ΛR,E an R-R-biring.)

1.12. Definition of W in general. We can view ΛR,E as an object of RingR , instead
of RingflR . Then define WR,E as a set-valued functor on RingR by

(1.12.1)                  WR,E (A) = HomRingR (ΛR,E , A).

The structure maps (1.11.2)–(1.11.3) give WR,E the structure of a functor with
values in R-algebras:

(1.12.2)                      WR,E : RingR −→ RingR .

(Note that here we really use the fact the the coproduct in RingflR agrees with that
in RingR . In 1.11, it was used only to justify the symbol ⊗ for the coproduct.)
   For any A ∈ RingR , let us call the WR,E (A) the R-algebra of E-typical Witt
vectors with entries in A. Its restriction to RingflR agrees with WR,E
                                                                   fl
                                                                       because RingflR
is a full subcategory of RingR .
   We will often write WE or W for WR,E when there is no risk of confusion. When
E consists of a single ideal m, we will also write WR,m or Wm .

1.13. Remark: Kan extensions. In categorical terms, WR,E is the left Kan exten-
             fl
sion of i ◦ WR,E along the inclusion functor i:

                                           i
(1.13.1)                         RingflR        / RingR
                                    O                O✤
                                fl
                               WR,E
                                                        ✤ WR,E
                                                         ✤
                                           i
                                 RingflR       / Ring .
                                                           R

(See Borceux [2], 3.7, for example, for the general theory of Kan extensions.) I
mention this only to emphasize that the passage from the E-flat case to the general
case is by a purely category-theoretic process, and hence the heart of the theory lies
in the E-flat case. This is in contrast to the common point of view that the purpose
of Witt vector functors is to lift rings from positive characteristic to characteristic
zero.
12                                      J. BORGER


1.14. Ghost map w. The ghost map
                                                    Y
                                w : WR,E (A) −→            A
                                                    N(E)

is the natural map induced by theQ universal property of Kan extensions applied to
                      fl
the inclusion maps WR,E  (A) → N(E) A, which are functorial in A. Equivalently,
it is the morphism of functors induced by the map
                                 ΨR,E = Λ0R,E −→ ΛR,E
of representing objects. When A is E-flat, it is harmless to identify w with the
inclusion map.

1.15. Example: p-typical and big Witt vectors. Suppose R is Z. If E consists of the
single ideal pZ, then W agrees with the classical p-typical Witt vector functor [26].
Indeed, for p-torsion free rings A, this follows from Cartier’s lemma, which says that
the traditionally defined p-typical Witt vector functor restricted to the category of
p-torsion-free rings has the same universal property as W fl . (See Bourbaki [6],
IX.44, exercise 14 or Lazard [20], VII§4.) Therefore, they are isomorphic functors.
For A general, one just observes that that the traditional functor is represented by
the ring Z[x0 , x1 , . . .], which is p-torsion free, and so it is the left Kan extension of
its restriction to the category of p-torsion-free rings. Therefore it agrees with W as
defined here.
   Another proof of this is given in 3.5. It makes a direct connection with the
traditional Witt components, rather than going through the universal property.
   Suppose instead that E is the family of all maximal ideals of Z. Then W agrees
with the classical big Witt vector functor. As above, this can be shown by reducing
to the torsion-free case and then citing the analogue of Cartier’s lemma. (Which
version of Cartier’s lemma depends on how we define the classical big Witt vector
functor. If we use generalized Witt polynomials, then we need Bourbaki [6], IX.55,
exercise 41b. If it is defined as the cofree λ-ring functor, as in Grothendieck [11],
then we need Wilkerson’s theorem [25], proposition 1.2.)
   Finally, we will see below (3.5) that when R is a complete discrete valuation
ring and E consists of the maximal ideal of R, then W agrees with Hazewinkel’s
ramified Witt vector functor [16], (18.6.13).

1.16. Comonad structure on W . The functor W fl : RingflR → RingflR is naturally
a comonad, being the composition of a functor (the forgetful one) with its right
adjoint, and this comonad structure prolongs naturally to WR,E . The reason for
this can be expressed in two ways—in terms of Kan extensions or in terms of
representing objects.
   The first way is to invoke the general fact that WR,E , as the Kan extension of
                 fl
the comonad WR,E    , has a natural comonad structure. This uses the commutativity
of (1.13.1) and the fullness and faithfulness of i. The other way is to translate the
structure on W fl of being a comonad into a structure on its representing object
ΛR,E . One then observes that this is exactly the structure for the underlying R-
algebra i(ΛR,E ) to represent a comonad on RingR . (This is called an R-plethory
structure in [5].)

1.17. Λ-rings. The category RingΛR,E of ΛR,E -rings is by definition the category
of coalgebras for the comonad WR,E , that is, the category of R-algebras equipped
                                                                 fl
with a coaction of the comonad WR,E . Since WR,E extends WR,E       , a ΛR,E -ring
structure on an E-flat R-algebra A is the same as a commuting family of Frobenius
lifts ψα .
                     THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                            13


   When R = Z and E is the family of all maximal ideals of Z, then a Λ-ring
is the same as a λ-ring in the sense of Grothendieck’s Riemann–Roch theory [11]
(and originally called a “special λ-ring”). In the E-flat case, this is Wilkerson’s
theorem ([25], proposition 1.2). The proof is an exercise in symmetric functions,
but the deeper meaning eludes me. The general case follows from the E-flat case
by category theory, as in 1.15.
1.18. Free Λ-rings and Λ ⊙ −. Since WR,E is a representable comonad on RingR ,
the forgetful functor from the category of ΛR,E -rings to the category of R-algebras
has a left adjoint denoted ΛR,E ⊙ −. This follows either from the adjoint functor
theorem in category theory (3.3.3 of Borceux [2]), or by simply writing down the
adjoint in terms of generators and relations, as in 1.3 of Borger–Wieland [5]. The
second approach involves the R-plethory structure on ΛR,E , and is similar to the de-
scription of tensor products, free differential rings, and so on in terms of generators
and relations.
   The functor ΛR,E ⊙ −, viewed as an endofunctor on the category of R-algebras,
is naturally a monad, simply because it is the left adjoint of the comonad WR,E .
Further, the category of algebras for this monad is naturally equivalent to RingΛR,E .
This can be proved using Beck’s theorem (4.4.4 of Borceux [3]), and is the same
as the fact that the category of K-modules, for any ring K, can be defined as the
category of algebras for the monad K ⊗− or coalgebras for the comonad Hom(K, −).
   We can interpret elements of ΛR,E as natural operations on ΛR,E -rings. Indeed,
a ΛR,E -ring structure on a ring A is by definition a (type of) map A → WR,E (A).
It therefore induces a set map
           ΛR,E × A −→ ΛR,E × WR,E (A) = ΛR,E × HomR (ΛR,E , A) −→ A,
which is functorial in A. In particular, if we take A = ΛR,E , we get a set map
                                               ◦
(1.18.1)                        ΛR,E × ΛR,E −→ ΛR,E .
It agrees with the restriction of the composition map ◦ on ΨR[1/E],E = R[1/E] ⊗R
ΨR,E given in 1.5. In particular, it is associative with identity e.
   In fact, all natural operations on ΛR,E -rings come from ΛR,E in this way. See
[5] for an abstract account from this point of view.
1.19. Remark: identity-based approaches. It is possible to set up the theory of ΛR,E -
rings more concretely using universal identities rather than category theory. (See
Buium, Buium–Simanca, and Joyal [7][9][18][19], for example.) In this subsection, I
will say something about that point of view and its relation to the category-theoretic
one, but it will not be used elsewhere in this paper.
   First suppose that for each α ∈ E, the ideal mα is generated by a single element
πα . For any ΛR,E -ring A and any element a ∈ A, there exists an element δα (a) ∈ A
such that
                               ψα (a) = aqα + πα δα (a).
If we now assume that A is E-flat, then the element δα (a) is uniquely determined
by this equation, and therefore δα defines an operator on A:
                                          ψα (a) − aqα
                                δα (a) =               .
                                               πα
Observe that if the integer qα maps to 0 in R, for example when R is a ring of
integers in a function field, then δα is additive; but otherwise it essentially never is.
(Also note that δα is the same as the operator θπα ,1 defined in 3.1 below.)
   Conversely, if A is an E-flat R-algebra, equipped with with operators δα , then
there is at most one ΛR,E -ring structure on A whose δα -operators are the given ones.
To say when such a ΛR,E -ring structure exists, we only need to express in terms
14                                      J. BORGER


of the operators δα the condition that the operators ψα be commuting R-algebra
homomorphisms. After dividing by any accumulated factors of πα , this gives the
identities of Buium–Simanca [9], definition 2.1:
                                r − rqα
(1.19.1)               δα (r) =         , for r ∈ R,
                                   πα
(1.19.2)           δα (a + b) = δα (a) + δα (b) + Cα (a, b),
(1.19.3)             δα (ab) = δα (a)bqα + aqα δα (b) + πα δα (a)δα (b),
                                                                       
(1.19.4)         δα ◦ δα′ (a) = δα′ ◦ δα (a) + Cα,α′ a, δα (a), δα′ (a) ,
where
                                                     qX
                                                      α −1
                           xqα + y qα − (x + y)qα
                                                              
                                                            1 qα qα −i i
(1.19.5)       Cα (x, y) =                        =−             x    y,
                                     πα               i=1
                                                           πα i

                             Cα′ (xqα , πα y) Cα (xqα′ , πα′ z)
(1.19.6) Cα,α′ (x, y, z) =                   −
                                   πα              πα′
                                                           δα (πα′ ) qα δα′ (πα ) qα′
                                                        −           z +          y .
                                                              πα′         πα
One can easily check that the coefficients of these polynomials are elements of R.
    For any R-algebra A, let us define a δR,E -structure on A to be a family of op-
erators δα satisfying the axioms above. Thus, if A is an E-flat R-algebra, then a
ΛR,E -structure—by definition a commuting family of Frobenius lifts indexed by E—
is equivalent to a δR,E -structure. The point of all this, then, is that if we no longer
require A to be E-flat, a δR,E -structure is generally stronger than having a com-
muting family of Frobenius lifts, but it is still equivalent to having a ΛR,E -structure.
This offers another point of view on the difference between a ΛR,E -structure and
a commuting family of Frobenius lifts: A δR,E -structure is well behaved from the
point of view of universal algebra (and hence so is a ΛR,E -structure) because it is
given by operators δα whose effect on the ring structure is described by universal
identities, as above; but the structure of a commuting family of Frobenius lifts does
not have this property because of the existential quantifier hidden in the word lift.
    The equivalence between δR,E -structures and ΛR,E -structures can be seen as
follows. For E-flat R-algebras A, it was explained above. For general A, the equiv-
alence can be shown by checking that the cofree δR,E -ring functor is represented
by an E-flat R-algebra (in fact, a free one). It therefore agrees with the left Kan
extension of its restriction to the category of E-flat algebras, and hence agrees with
WR,E .
    We could extend the identity-based approach to the case where the ideals mα
are not principal, but then we would need operators
(1.19.7)                      δα,πα∗ (x) = πα∗ (ψα (x) − xqα )
for every element πα∗ ∈ mα −1
                              , or at least for those in a chosen generating set of m−1
                                                                                     α ,
and we would need additional axioms relating them. A particularly convenient
                     −1
generating set of mα     is one of the form {1, πα∗ }, which always exists. Further,
for each α ∈ E, it is enough to use the operators ψα and δα,πα∗ instead of δα,1
and δα,πα∗ , because δα,1 can be expressed in terms of ψα , by (1.19.7). Therefore if
we fix elements πα∗ ∈ m−1α which S are R-module generators modulo 1, the relations
needed for the generating set α∈E {ψα , δα,πα∗ } of operators are those in (1.19.1)–
(1.19.6) but one needs to make the following changes: for each α ∈ E, replace each
occurrence of πα−1 with πα∗ , and add axioms that ψα is an R-algebra homomorphism,
that ψα commutes with all ψα′ and all δα′ ,πα∗ ′ , and that (1.19.7) holds.
                     THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                            15


   When R is an Fp -algebra for some prime number p, the polynomials Cα (x, y)
are zero and the axioms above simplify considerably. In particular, the operators
δα are additive, and so it is possible to describe a ΛR,E -structure using a cocommu-
tative twisted bialgebra, the additive bialgebra of the plethory ΛR,E . (See Borger–
Wieland [5], sections 2 and 10.)

1.20. Localization of the ring R of scalars. Let R′ be an E-flat R-algebra such
that the structure map R → R′ is an epimorphism of rings. (For example, the map
Spec R′ → Spec R could be an open immersion.) Then the family (mα )α∈E induces
a family (m′α )α∈E of ideals of R′ , where m′α = mα R′ . By the assumptions on R′ ,
each m′α is supramaximal. Let us write E ′ = E and use the notation E ′ for the
index set of the m′α .
   Let us construct an isomorphism:
                                                ∼
(1.20.1)                        R′ ⊗R ΛR,E −→ ΛR′ ,E ′ .
   The category RingflΛR′ ,E′ (see 1.6) is a subcategory of the category of RingflΛR,E .
Indeed, any object A′ ∈ RingflΛR′ ,E′ is an R-algebra with endomorphisms ψmα , for
each α ∈ E. These endomorphisms are again commuting Frobenius lifts, simply
because A′ /m′α A′ = A′ /mα A′ . Since A′ is E ′ -flat (and by the assumptions on R′ ),
A′ is E-flat. Therefore, it can be viewed as a ΛR,E -ring.
   Further, RingflΛR′ ,E′ agrees with the subcategory of RingflΛR,E consisting of objects
A whose structure map R → A factors through R′ , necessarily uniquely. Now con-
sider the underlying-set functor on this category. From the definition of RingflΛR′ ,E′ ,
this functor is represented by the right-hand side of (1.20.1), and from the second
description, it is represented by the left-hand side. Let (1.20.1) be the induced
isomorphism on representing objects. It sends an element r′ ⊗ f to r′ f.
   The isomorphism of represented functors which is induced by (1.20.1) gives nat-
ural maps
                                            ∼
(1.20.2)                      WR′ ,E ′ (A′ ) −→ WR,E (A′ ),
for R′ -algebras A′ .
   Finally, let us show that for any R′ -algebra B ′ , the following canonical map is
an isomorphism:
                                           ∼
(1.20.3)                     ΛR,E ⊙ B ′ −→ ΛR′ ,E ′ ⊙ B ′ .
It is enough to show that for any R′ -algebra A′ , the induced map
                 HomR′ (ΛR′ ,E ′ ⊙ B ′ , A′ ) −→ HomR′ (ΛR,E ⊙ B ′ , A′ )
is a bijection. Since RingR′ is a full subcategory of RingR , the right-hand side agrees
with HomR (ΛR,E ⊙ B ′ , A′ ), and so the map above is an isomorphism by (1.20.2).

1.21. Teichmüller lifts. Let A be an R-algebra, let A◦ denote the commutative
monoid of all elements of A under multiplication, and let R[A◦ ] denote the monoid
algebra on A◦ . Then for each α ∈ E, the monoid endomorphism a 7→ aqα of A◦
induces an R-algebra endomorphism ψα of R[A◦ ] which reduces to the qα -th power
map modulo mα . Since R[A◦ ] is free as an R-module, it is flat. And since the
various ψα commute with each other, they provide R[A◦ ] with a ΛR,E -structure.
Combined with the R-algebra map R[A◦ ] → A given by the counit of the evident
adjunction, this gives, by the right-adjoint property of WR,E , a ΛR,E -ring map
t : R[A◦ ] → WR,E (A). We write the composite monoid map
                                unit            t◦
                             A◦ −→ R[A◦ ]◦ −→ WR,E (A)◦
16                                    J. BORGER


as simply a 7→ [a]. It is a section of the R-algebra map w0 : WR,E (A) → A and is
easily seen to be functorial in A. The element [a] is called the Teichmüller lift of a.

                         2. Grading and truncations
2.1. Ordering on Z . For two elements n′ , n ∈ Z(E) = E Z, write n′ ⩽ n if we
                     (E)
                                                     L
have n′α ⩽ nα for all α ∈ E. Also put
                             [0, n] = {n′ ∈ N(E) | n′ ⩽ n}.
2.2. Truncations. We have the following decomposition of ΨR,E :
                   OO                 O
           ΨR,E =          R[ψα◦i ] =      R[ψn ] = R[ψn |n ∈ N(E) ].
                      α∈E i∈N             n∈N(E)
                       (E)
(Thus, ΨR,E is an N -indexed coproduct in the category of R-algebras, much
like graded rings are monoid-indexed coproducts in the category of modules. One
might say that ΨR,E is an N(E) -graded plethory. This point of view will not be
used below.) For each n ∈ Z(E) , put
                   O O                   O
                              R[ψα◦i ] =    R[ψn′ ] = R ψn′ |n′ ∈ [0, n] .
                                                                       
         ΨR,E,n =
                    α∈E 0⩽i⩽nα             n′ ∈[0,n]

Then ΨR,E,n represents the RingR -valued functor that sends A to the product ring
                                            (E)
A[0,n] , which is naturally a quotient of AN .
   Define a similar filtration on ΛR,E by
                                                          
(2.2.1)                 ΛR,E,n = ΛR,E ∩ R[1/E] ⊗R ΨR,E,n .
We will often use the shortened forms ΛE,n , ΨE,n , Λm,n , Ψm,n , and so on.
2.3. Proposition.      (a) For each n ∈ N(E) , the R-scheme Spec ΛR,E,n admits
       a unique structure of an R-algebra object in the category of R-schemes such
       that the map Spec ΛR,E → Spec ΛR,E,n induced by the inclusion ΛR,E,n ⊆
       ΛR,E is a homomorphism of R-algebra schemes over R.
   (b) For each m, n ∈ N(E) , we have
(2.3.1)                      ΛR,E,m ◦ ΛR,E,n ⊆ ΛR,E,m+n ,
          where ◦ denotes the composition map of (1.18.1).
Proof. (a): Write Λ = ΛR,E , Λn = ΛR,E,n , and so on. First observe that, for any
integer i ⩾ 0, all the maps in the diagram
                                            ai
                       R[1/E] ⊗R Ψn⊗R i          / R[1/E] ⊗R Ψ⊗R i
                              O                           O
                                                        ci

                                            bi
                             Λn⊗R i                    / Λ ⊗R i

are injective. Indeed, ai clearly is; the vertical maps are because they become
isomorphisms after base change to R[1/E] and because Λn and Λ are E-flat; and it
follows formally that bi is injective. Then the uniqueness of the desired R-algebra
scheme structure on Spec Λn , follows from the injectivity of b2 .
   Now consider existence. Let
                      ∆ : R[1/E] ⊗R Ψ −→ R[1/E] ⊗R Ψ ⊗R Ψ
denote the ring map that induces the addition (resp. multiplication) map on the ring
scheme Spec R[1/E] ⊗R ΨR . To show that the desired addition and multiplication
maps on Spec Λn exist, it is enough to show
(2.3.2)                           ∆(Λn ) ⊆ Λn ⊗R Λn .
                    THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                           17


In fact, once we do this, we will be done: because each ci ◦ bi is injective, the ring
axioms (associativity, distributivity, . . .) will follow from those on Spec R[1/E] ⊗R
Ψ.
   The map ∆ sends ψα to ψα ⊗ 1 + 1 ⊗ ψα (resp. ψα ⊗ ψα ). Therefore we have
                    ∆(R[1/E] ⊗R Ψn ) ⊆ R[1/E] ⊗R Ψn ⊗R Ψn ,
and hence
                   ∆(Λn ) ⊆ Λ⊗R 2 ∩ R[1/E] ⊗R Ψn⊗R 2 = Λn⊗R 2 .
                                                    

This establishes (2.3.2) and hence completes the proof of (a).
  (b): Combine the definition (2.2.1) with the inclusion
             (R[1/E] ⊗R Ψm ) ◦ (R[1/E] ⊗R Ψn ) ⊆ (R[1/E] ⊗R Ψm+n )
and the inclusion Λm ◦ Λn ⊆ Λ.                                                      
2.4. Witt vectors of finite length. Let WR,E,n denote the functor RingR → RingR
represented by ΛR,E,n :
(2.4.1)                   WR,E,n (A) = HomR (ΛR,E,n , A).
We call WR,E,n the E-typical Witt vector functor of length n. As in 1.12, we will
often write WE,n or Wn ; when E = {m}, we will also write WR,m,n or Wm,n . We
then have
(2.4.2)                     WR,E (A) = limn WR,E,n (A).
(Note that it is often better to view WR,E (A) as a pro-ring than to actually take
the limit. If we preferred topological rings to pro-rings, we could take the limit and
endow it with the natural pro-discrete topology.) It follows from 4.4 and (5.4.2)
below that the maps in this projective system are surjective.
   The (truncated) ghost map
(2.4.3)                     w⩽n : WR,E,n (A) −→ A[0,n] ,
is the one induced by the inclusion ΨR,E,n ⊆ ΛR,E,n of representing objects. For
any i ∈ [0, n], the composition w⩽n with the projection onto the i-th factor gives
another natural map
(2.4.4)                        wi : WR,E,n (A) −→ A.
Also the containment (2.3.1) induces an R-algebra map
                                                       
(2.4.5)               WR,E,m+n (A) −→ WR,E,n WR,E,m (A)
which sends an element a : ΛR,E,m+n → A of WR,E,m+n (A) to the map γ 7→ [β 7→
a(β ◦ γ)], for variables γ ∈ ΛR,E,n and β ∈ ΛR,E,m . We will call (2.4.5) co-plethysm.
It agrees with the map of functors induced by the map
(2.4.6)          ΛR,E,m ⊙ ΛR,E,n −→ ΛR,E,m+n ,       β ⊙ γ 7→ β ◦ γ
on representing objects, where β ⊙ γ is defined as in [5].
  Finally, observe that for any element f ∈ ΛR,E,n the natural ΛR,E -ring operation
                              f : WR,E (A) → WR,E (A)
(a map of sets) descends to a map f : WR,E,m+n (A) → WR,E,m (A). Indeed, it is
the composition
                    (2.4.5)              
(2.4.7) WR,E,m+n (A) −→ WR,E,n WR,E,m (A) = Hom(ΛR,E,n , WR,E,m (A))
                                                                  −(f )
                                                                  −→ WR,E,m (A),
18                                      J. BORGER


where −(f ) denotes the map that evaluates at f . Particularly important is the
example f = ψn , where the induced map
(2.4.8)                     ψn : WR,E,m+n (A) → WR,E,m (A)
is a ring homomorphism.

2.5. Remark: traditional versus normalized indexing. Consider the p-typical Witt
vectors, where R is Z and E consists of the single ideal pZ. Let Wn′ denote Witt’s
functor, as defined in [26]. So, for example, Wn′ (Fp ) = Z/pn Z. In 3.5, we will
construct an isomorphism Wn+1  ′   ∼
                                   = Wn . Thus, up to a normalization of indices, our
truncated Witt functors agree with Witt’s.
   The reason for this normalization is to make the indexing behave well under
plethysm. By (2.3.1) and (2.4.5), the index set has the structure of a commutative
monoid, and so it is preferable to use an index set with a familiar monoid structure.
If we were to insist on agreement with Witt’s indexing, we would have to replace
the sum m + n in (2.3.1) and (2.4.5) with m + n − (1, 1, . . .), where this would be
computed in the product group ZE . The reason why this has not come up in earlier
work is that the plethysm structure has traditionally been used only through the
Frobenius maps ψα . In other words, only the shift operator on the indexing set
was used. Thus the distinction between N and Z⩾1 was not so important because
the shift operator n 7→ n + 1 is written the same way on both. But making the
identification of N and Z⩾1 a monoid isomorphism would involve the unwelcome
addition law m + n − 1 on Z⩾1 .
   It is different with the big Witt vectors, where R is Z and E consists of all
maximal ideals (1.15). They are also traditionally indexed by the positive integers
([16], (17.4.4)), but here the positive integers are used multiplicatively rather than
additively. In particular, the monoid structure that is required is the obvious one;
so the traditional indexing is in agreement with the normalized one: the big Witt
ring Wpn (A) (using traditional multiplicative indexing) is naturally isomorphic to
                                              ′
our p-typical ring Wn (A) and to Witt’s Wn+1     (A).

2.6. Localization of the ring R of scalars. Let R′ be an E-flat R-algebra such that
the structure map R → R′ is an epimorphism of rings, as in 1.20.
   Then for each n ∈ N(E) , we have
             R′ ⊗R ΛR,E,n = R′ ⊗R ΛR,E ∩ (R[1/E] ⊗R ΨR,E,n )
                                                                  
                            ∼
                            → R′ ⊗R ΛR,E ∩ (R′ [1/E] ⊗R′ ΨR′ ,E ′ ,n ).
                                            

(We only need to check that the displayed map is an isomorphism along E, in which
case it is is true because R′ is E-flat over R.) By (1.20.1), this gives an isomorphism
of R′ -algebras
                                                  ∼
(2.6.1)                        R′ ⊗R ΛR,E,n −→ ΛR′ ,E ′ ,n .
The induced isomorphism of represented functors gives natural maps
                                              ∼
(2.6.2)                      WR′ ,E ′ ,n (A′ ) −→ WR,E,n (A′ ),
for R′ -algebras A′ . If A is an R-algebra, the inverse of this map induces a map
(2.6.3)                R′ ⊗R WR,E,n (A) −→ WR′ ,E ′ ,n (R′ ⊗R A)
We will see in 6.1 that this is an isomorphism.
  As with (1.20.3), the map (2.6.2) induces an isomorphism
                                            ∼
(2.6.4)                      ΛR,E,n ⊙ B ′ −→ ΛR′ ,E ′ ,n ⊙ B ′ ,
for any R′ -algebra B ′ ,
                       THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                                        19


2.7. Proposition. Let A be an E-flat R-algebra. Then the ghost map
                                  w⩽n : WR,E,n (A) −→ A[0,n]
is injective. If A is an R[1/E]-algebra, it is an isomorphism.
   Recall that the analogous facts for infinite-length Witt vectors are also true,
either by construction (1.8) or by the universal property (1.9).
Proof. If every ideal in E is the unit ideal, then ΛR,E = ΨR,E , and hence we have
ΛR,E,n = ΨR,E,n . The statement about R[1/E]-algebras then follows from (2.6.1).
The statement about E-flat R-algebras follows by considering the injection A →
R[1/E] ⊗R A and applying the previous case to R[1/E] ⊗R A.                      

                             3. Principal single-prime case
   For this section, we will restrict to the case where E consists of one ideal m
generated by an element π. Our purpose is to extend the classical components of
Witt vectors from the p-typical context (where R is Z and E consists of the single
ideal pZ) to this slightly more general one. The reason for this is that the Witt
components are well-suited to calculation. In the following sections, we will see how
to use them, together with 4.1, 5.4, and 6.1, to draw conclusions when E is general.
   In fact, the usual arguments and definitions in the classical theory of Witt vectors
carry over as long as one modifies the usual Witt polynomials by replacing every p
in an exponent with qm , and every p in a coefficient with π. Some things, such as
the Verschiebung operator, depend on the choice of π, and others do not, such as
the Verschiebung filtration.
   Let n denote an element of N. Let us abbreviate Λm = ΛR,E , Λm,n = ΛR,E,n ,
Wm = WR,E , q = qm , ψ = ψm , and so on.
3.1. θ operators. Define elements θπ,0 , θπ,1 , . . . of
                               R[1/π] ⊗R Λm = R[1/π] ⊗R Ψm
recursively by the generalized Witt polynomials
                                        n             n−1
                                     q       q
(3.1.1)                      ψ ◦n = θπ,0 + πθπ,1 + · · · + π n θπ,n .
(Note that the exponent on the left side means iterated composition, while the
exponents on the right mean usual exponentiation, iterated multiplication.) As
in 1.5, we can view the elements θπ,i as natural operators on ΨR[1/π],m -rings. We
will often write θi = θπ,i when π is clear.
3.2. Lemma. We have
                               q
(3.2.1)            ψ ◦ θπ,n = θπ,n + πθπ,n+1 + πP (θπ,0 , . . . , θπ,n−1 ),
for some polynomial P (θπ,0 , . . . , θπ,n−1 ) with coefficients in R.
Proof. It is clear for n = 0. For n ⩾ 1, we will use induction. Recall the general
implication
                                              j    j
                      x ≡ y mod m =⇒ xq ≡ y q mod mj+1 ,
for j ⩾ 1, which itself is easily proved by induction. Together with the formula
(3.2.1) for ψ ◦ θπ,i with i < n, this implies
                       n
                       X                      n−i
          ψ ◦ ψ ◦n =         π i (ψ ◦ θi )q
                       i=0
                                       n−1
                                                             n−i
                                               π i (θiq )q
                                       X
                   ≡ π n ψ ◦ θn +                                  mod mn+1 R[θ0 , . . . , θn−1 ]
                                       i=0
20                                           J. BORGER


When this is combined with the defining formula (3.1.1) for ψ ◦(n+1) , we have
                π n ψ ◦ θn ≡ π n θnq + π n+1 θn+1 mod mn+1 R[θ0 , . . . , θn−1 ].
Dividing by π n completes the proof.                                                       

3.3. Proposition. The elements θπ,0 , θπ,1 , . . . of R[1/π] ⊗R Λm lie in Λm , and they
generate Λm freely as an R-algebra. Further, the elements θπ,0 , . . . , θπ,n lie in Λm,n ,
and they generate Λm,n freely as an R-algebra.
     This is essentially Witt’s theorem 1 [26].

Proof. By induction, the elements θ0 , . . . , θn generate the same sub-R[1/π]-algebra
of R[1/π] ⊗R Λm as ψ ◦0 , . . . , ψ ◦n , and are hence algebraically independent over
R[1/π]. Since R ⊆ R[1/π], they are also algebraically independent over R.
   LetSBn be the sub-R-algebra of R[1/π] ⊗R Λm generated by θ0 , . . . , θn , and let
B = n Bn . To show Λm ⊇ B, we may assume by induction that Λm ⊇ Bn and
then show Λm ⊇ Bn+1 . By 3.2 and because Λm is a Λm -ring, we have
                     πθn+1 ∈ ψ ◦ θn − θnq + mΛm,n ⊆ mΛm .
                                               

Dividing by π, we have θn+1 ∈ Λm , and hence Λm ⊇ Bn [θn+1 ] = Bn+1 .
  On the other hand, by 3.2 again, we have
                                   ψ ◦ θn ≡ θnq mod mBn+1
for all n. Therefore B, since it is generated by the θn , is a sub-Λm -ring of R[1/π]⊗R
Λm . It follows that B ⊇ Λm ◦e = Λm and hence that B = Λm .
   Last, the equality Λm,n = Bn follows immediately from the above:
                                                                          
              Λm,n = Λm ∩ R[1/π] ⊗R Ψm,n = B ∩ R[1/π] ⊗R Ψm,n
                     = R[θ0 , . . .] ∩ R[1/π][θ0 , . . . , θn ]
                     = R[θ0 , . . . , θn ] = Bn .
                                                                                           

3.4. Example: Presentations of Λm,n ⊙ A. Using 3.3, we can turn a presentation
of an R-algebra A into a presentation of Λm,n ⊙ A. We have
                           Λm,n ⊙ R[x] ∼
                                       = Λm,n = R[θ0 , . . . , θn ],
where θk is short for θπ,k , which corresponds to the element θπ,k (x) = θπ,k ⊙ x.
   Because the functor Λm,n ⊙ − preserves coproducts and coequalizers, we have
                                                          
(3.4.1)      Λm,n ⊙ R[x1 , . . . , xr ]/(f1 , . . . , fs ) = R[θi (xj )]/(θi (fk )),
where 0 ⩽ i ⩽ n, 1 ⩽ j ⩽ r, and 1 ⩽ k ⩽ s. Here each expression θi (xj ) is a single
free variable, and θi (fk ) is understood to be the polynomial in the variables θi (xj )
that results from expanding θi (fk ) using the sum and product laws for θi . Because
Λm,n ⊙ − preserves filtered colimits, we can give a similar presentation of Λm,n ⊙ A
for any R-algebra A. Similarly, we can take the colimit over n to get a presentation
for Λm ⊙ A.
     In the E-typical case, where E is finite, one can write down a presentation of
ΛR,E ⊙ A by iterating (3.4.1), according to 5.3 below. We can pass from the case
where E is finite to the case where it is arbitrary by taking colimits, as in 5.1.
     The method above is not particular to the θ operators—it works for any subset
of Λm,n that generates it freely as an R-algebra. For example, we can use the δ
operators of 1.19. Let δ i ∈ Λm denote the i-th iterate of δπ . Then the elements
δ 0 , . . . , δ n lie in Λm,n and freely generate it as an R-algebra. (As in 3.3, this follows
                        THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                                   21


by induction, but in this case, there are no subtle congruences to check.) Therefore
we have
             Λm,n ⊙ R[x1 , . . . , xr ]/(f1 , . . . , fs ) = R[δ i (xj )]/(δ i (fk )),
                                                          
(3.4.2)
where 0 ⩽ i ⩽ n, 1 ⩽ j ⩽ r, and 1 ⩽ k ⩽ s. We interpret the expressions δ i (xj )
and δ i (fk ) as above. The general E-typical case can be handled as above. (See
Buium–Simanca [9], proof of proposition 2.12.)
3.5. Witt components. It follows from 3.3 that, given π, we have a bijection
                                              ∼
(3.5.1)                           Wm (A) −→ A × A × · · · ,
which sends a map f : Λm → A to the sequence (f (θπ,0 ), f (θπ,1 ), . . .). To make
the dependence on π explicit, we will often write (x0 , x1 , . . .)π for the image of
(x0 , x1 , . . .) under the inverse of this map. If R = Z and π = p, then this identifies
Wm (A) with the ring of p-typical Witt vectors as defined traditionally. Similarly,
when R is a complete discrete valuation ring, we get an identification of Wm (A) with
                                                    R
Hazewinkel’s ring of ramified Witt vectors Wq,∞        (A). (See [16], (18.6.13), (25.3.17),
and (25.3.26)(i).) We call the xi the Witt components (relative to π) of the element
(x0 , . . .)π ∈ W (A).
   Similarly, using the free generating set θπ,0 , . . . , θπ,n of Λm,n , we have a bijection
                                                    ∼
(3.5.2)                               Wm,n (A) −→ A[0,n] .
As above, we will write (x0 , . . . , xn )π for the image of (x0 , . . . , xn ) under the inverse
of this map. This identifies Wm,n (A) with the traditionally defined ring of p-typical
Witt vectors of length n + 1. (For remarks on the +1 shift, see 2.5.)
   Note that the Witt components do not depend on the choice of π in a simple,
multilinear way. For example, if u is an invertible element of R and we have
                               (x0 , x1 , . . .)π = (y0 , y1 , . . .)uπ ,
then we have
            x0 = y0 ,       x1 = uy1 ,         x2 = u2 y2 + π −1 (u − uq )y1q ,   ....
                                                              0    1
    As in 3.4, we could use the free generating set δ , δ , . . . of Λm instead of θ0 , θ1 , . . ..
This would give a different bijection between Wm (A) and the set AN , and hence an
R-algebra structure on the set AN which is isomorphic to Witt’s but not equal to
it. The truncated versions agree up to A × A, but differ after that. This is simply
because δ 0 = θ0 and δ 1 = θ1 , but δ 2 6= θ2 . (See Joyal [19], p. 179.)
3.6. The ghost principle. It follows from the descriptions (3.5.1) and (3.5.2) that
Wm and Wm,n preserve surjectivity. On the other hand, every R-algebra is a quo-
tient of an m-flat R-algebra (even a free one). Therefore to prove any functorial
identity involving rings of Witt vectors when m is principal, it is enough to restrict to
the m-flat case. Further, any m-flat R-algebra A is contained in an R[1/m]-algebra,
such as R[1/m] ⊗R A. Since Wm and Wm,n , being representable functors, preserve
injectivity, it is even enough to check functorial identities on R[1/m]-algebras A, in
which case rings of Witt vectors agree with the much more tractable rings of ghost
components. An example with details is given in 3.7.
3.7. Verschiebung. For any R-algebra A define an operator Vπ , called the Ver-
schiebung (relative to π), on Wm (A) by
                                             
(3.7.1)                 Vπ (y0 , y1 , . . .)π = (0, y0 , y1 , . . .)π .
This is clearly functorial in A. Define another, identically denoted operator on the
ghost ring AN by the formula
                                             
(3.7.2)                  Vπ hz0 , z1 , . . .i = h0, πz0 , πz1 , . . .i.
22                                           J. BORGER


These operators are compatible in that we have w(Vπ (y)) = Vπ (w(y)) for all y ∈
Wm (A), and the operator Vπ on the ghost ring is clearly R-linear. It follows by the
ghost principle that the operator Vπ on Wm (A) is R-linear. Here is the argument
in some detail.
    We need to check the identities rVπ (y) = Vπ (ry) and Vπ (x + y) = Vπ (x) + Vπ (y),
for r ∈ R, x, y ∈ Wm (A). Write x = (x0 , x1 , . . .)π and y = (y0 , y1 , . . .)π . If A is a
E-flat, the ghost map w : Wm (A) → AN is injective. Therefore Vπ is R-linear on
Wm (A), by the R-linearity of Vπ on the ghost ring.
    The general case then follows from E-flat case. Fix an E-flat R-algebra Ã with
a surjective R-algebra map Ã → A. For each i, let ỹi be a pre-image of yi , and
set ỹ = (ỹ0 , . . .)π ∈ Wm (A). The induced map f : Wm (Ã) → Wm (A) then satisfies
f (ỹ) = y. Therefore we have
               Vπ (ry) = Vπ (rf (ỹ)) = Vπ (f (rỹ)) = f (Vπ (rỹ))
                       = f (rVπ (ỹ)) = rf (Vπ (ỹ)) = rVπ (f (ỹ)) = rVπ (y).
The additivity axiom follows similarly.

3.8. Example. WR,m,n (R) has a presentation
                      R[x1 , . . . , xn ]/(xi xj − π i xj | 1 ⩽ i ⩽ j ⩽ n),
where the element xi corresponds to Vπi (1).

3.9. Teichmüller lifts. Under the composition
                              a7→[a]                   w
                          A             / W (A)               / A× A × ···
                                             2
(see 1.21), the image of a is ha, aq , aq , . . .i. It follows from the ghost principle that
                                  [a] = (a, 0, 0, . . .)π ∈ W (A).
Multiplication by Teichmüller lifts also has a simple description in terms of Witt
components:
                                                                 i
(3.9.1)                    [a](. . . , bi , . . .)π = (. . . , aq bi , . . .)π .
Again, this follows from the ghost principle.

                           4. General single-prime case
   Assume E consists of a single ideal m, possibly not principal. Let n be an element
of N. Let us write WR,m,n = WR,E,n and so on.
   Let Km denote Rm [1/m]. If m is the unit ideal, we understand Rm , and hence
Km , to be the zero ring. Otherwise, Rm is a discrete valuation ring and Km is its
fraction field. In particular, m becomes principal in R[1/m], Rm , and Km . The
following proposition then allows us to describe WR,m,n (A) in terms of the case
where m is principal, and hence in terms of Witt components.
4.1. Proposition. For R′ = R[1/m], Rm , Km , write WR′ ,m,n = WR′ ,mR′ ,n . Then
for any R-algebra A, the ring WR,m,n (A) is the equalizer of the two maps
                                                         /
   WR[1/m],m,n R[1/m] ⊗R A × WRm ,m,n Rm ⊗R A                / WKm ,m,n (Km ⊗R A)
induced by projection onto the two factors and the bifunctoriality of W−,m,n (−).
Proof. The diagram
                                                                 pr1
                                                                        /
                              R         / R[1/m] × Rm                  / Km
                                                                 pr2
                     THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                             23


is an equalizer diagram. Since Km is m-flat, so is any sub-R-module of Km . It
follows that for any R-algebra A, the induced diagram
                                        
                                                      /
                   A      / R[1/m] × Rm ⊗R A         / Km ⊗R A

is an equalizer diagram. Since WR,m,n is representable, it preserves equalizers, and
so the induced diagram (writing Wn = WR,m,n )
                                                             /
      Wn (A)       / Wn R[1/m] ⊗R A × Wn Rm ⊗R A                 / Wn (Km ⊗R A)
is also an equalizer diagram. Then (2.6.2) completes the proof.                        
4.2. Verschiebung in general. We can define Verschiebung maps
(4.2.1)                    V j : mj ⊗R WR,m (A) −→ WR,m (A).
To do this, it is enough, by 4.1, to restrict to the case where m is principal, as long
as our construction is functorial in A and R. So, choose a generator π ∈ m and
define
(4.2.2)                              V j (π j ⊗ y) = Vπj (y),
for all y ∈ WR,m (A). On ghost components it satisfies
                    V j (x ⊗ hz0 , z1 , . . .i) = h0, . . . , 0, xz0 , xz1 , . . .i,
where the number of leading zeros is j. In particular, it is independent of the choice
of π, by the ghost principle.
   If we write WR,m (A)(j) for WR,m (A) viewed as a WR,m (A)-algebra by way of the
map ψj : WR,m (A) → WR,m (A), then the map
(4.2.3)                  V j : mj ⊗R WR,m (A)(j) −→ WR,m (A),
is WR,m (A)-linear, as is easily checked using the ghost principle. Expressed as a
formula, it says
(4.2.4)                         V j (x ⊗ yψj (z)) = V j (x ⊗ y)z.
In particular, the image V j WR,m (A) of V j is an ideal of WR,m (A).
   Let us also record the identities
                                ψj V j (x ⊗ y) = xy
                                              
(4.2.5)
and
(4.2.6)       V j (x ⊗ y)V j (x′ ⊗ y ′ ) = xV j (x′ ⊗ yy ′ ) ∈ mj V j WR,m (A).
Again, one checks these using the ghost principle.
  Finally, for any n ∈ N, the map V j descends to a map
(4.2.7)              V j : mj ⊗R WR,m,n (A)(j) −→ WR,m,n+j (A),
and the obvious analogues of the identities above hold here.

4.3. Remark. We can define Verschiebung maps even if we no longer      assume there
is only one ideal in E. For any j ∈ N(E) , let J denote the ideal α mjαα of R. Then
                                                                 Q
V j would be a map J ⊗R WR,E (A) → WR,E (A). The identities above, suitably
interpreted, continue to hold. We will not need this multiple-prime version.
4.4. Proposition. The sequence
                                                 Vj
(4.4.1)      0 −→ mj ⊗R WR,m,n (A)(j) −→ WR,m,n+j (A) −→ WR,m,j (A) −→ 0
is exact.
24                                                  J. BORGER


Proof. Write WR′ ,n = WR′ ,mR′ ,n when R′ is an R-algebra such that the ideal mR′
is supramaximal.
    First consider the case where m is principal. Let π ∈ m be a generator. Us-
ing (3.7.1), it is clear that V j is injective and that its image is the set of Witt
vectors whose Witt components (relative π) are 0 in positions 0 to j − 1. By 3.5,
the pre-image of 0 under the map WR,n+j (A) → WR,j (A) is the same subset, and
the map WR,n+j (A) → WR,j (A) is surjective.
    Now consider the general case. Augment the diagram (4.4.1) by expressing each
term of (4.4.1) as an equalizer as in 4.1. Here we use that m is R-flat. It then
follows from the principal case and the snake lemma that (4.4.1) is left exact.
    It remains to prove that the map WR,n+j (A) → WR,j (A) is surjective. By
induction, we can assume n = 1. By 4.1, for any i ∈ N we have
      WR,i (A) = WRm ,i (Rm ⊗R A) ×WKm ,i (Km ⊗R A) WR[1/m],i (R[1/m] ⊗R A).
Now let π denote a generator of the maximal ideal of Rm , and suppose two elements
          y = (y0 , . . . , yj )π ∈ WRm ,j (Rm ⊗R A),
          z = hz0 , . . . , zj i ∈ (R[1/m] ⊗R A)j+1 = WR[1/m],j (R[1/m] ⊗R A)
have the same image in WKm ,j (Km ⊗R A). To lift the corresponding element of
Wj (A) to Wj+1 (A), we need to find elements
                    yj+1 ∈ Rm ⊗R A                   and zj+1 ∈ R[1/m] ⊗R A
such that in Km ⊗R A, we have
                                        j+1
(4.4.2)                           y0q         + · · · + π j+1 yj+1 = zj+1 .
So, choose an element zj+1 ∈ A whose image under the surjection
                      A −→ A/(mA)j+1 = Rm /(mRm )j+1 ⊗R A
                                   j+1
agrees with the image of y0q                  + · · · + π j yj . It follows that the element
                            j+1
                      y0q         + · · · + π j yjq − 1 ⊗ zj+1 ∈ Rm ⊗R A
lies in π j+1 (Rm ⊗R A). It thus equals π j+1 yj+1 for some element yj+1 ∈ Rm ⊗R A.
And so yj+1 and zj+1 satisfy (4.4.2).                                            

4.5. Corollary. For any R-algebra A, we have
                                       ∼
                      M
(4.5.1)                    mi ⊗R A(i) −→ grV WR,m,n (A),
                            i∈[0,n]

where A(i) denotes A viewed as a Wn (A)-module via the ring map wi : Wn (A) → A.
4.6. Reduced ghost components. We can define infinitely many ghost components
for Witt vectors of finite length n if we are willing to settle for answers modulo
mn+1 .
   First assume m is generated by some element π. By examining the Witt polyno-
mials (3.1.1), we can see that for any i ⩾ 0, the composition
                                                    w
                                            i
                                  WR,m (A) −→ A −→ A/mn+1 A
vanishes on V n+1 WR,m (A). It therefore factors through WR,m,n (A), giving a map
w̄i from WR,m,n (A) to A/mn+1 A.
    When m is not assumed to be principal, we define w̄i by localizing at m:
                                                        w̄
                                     i
WR,m,n (A) −→ WRm ,mRm ,n (Rm ⊗R A) −→ (Rm ⊗R A)/mn+1 (Rm ⊗R A) = A/mn+1 A,
                    THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                            25


where the middle map is w̄i as constructed above in the principal case. We call the
composition
                                           w̄
(4.6.1)                                   i
                              WR,m,n (A) −→ A/mn+1 A
the i-th reduced ghost component map.

                             5. Multiple-prime case
   The purpose of this section is to give some results on reducing the family E
(of 1.2) to simpler families. The first reduces from the case where E is arbitrary to
the case where it is finite, and the second reduces from the case where it is finite to
the case where it has a single element. We will often write WE = WR,E , ΛE = ΛR,E ,
and so on, for short.
5.1. Proposition. The canonical maps
(5.1.1)                        colimE ′ ΛR,E ′ −→ ΛR,E ,
(5.1.2)                     colimE ′ ΛR,E ′ ,n′ −→ ΛR,E,n ,
are isomorphisms. Here E ′ runs over the finite subfamilies of E, and n′ is the
restriction to E ′ of a given element n ∈ N(E) .
Proof. Consider (5.1.1) first. Since each map ΛE ′ → ΛE is an injection, (5.1.1) is
an injection. Therefore, since ΛE is freely generated as a ΛE -ring by the element
e = ψ0 , it is enough to show the sub-ΨE -ring colimE ′ ΛE ′ of ΛE is a sub-ΛE -ring.
Since it is flat, we only need to check the Frobenius lift property. So, suppose m ∈ E.
For any element x of the colimit, there is a finite family E ′′ such that x ∈ ΛE ′′ and
m ∈ E ′′ . But ΛE ′′ is a ΛE ′′ -ring. So we have ψm (x) ≡ xqm modulo mΛE ′′ , and
hence modulo m(colimE ′ ΛE ′ ). Therefore the Frobenius lift property holds for the
colimit ring.
   Then (5.1.2) follows:
   ΛE,n = (R[1/E] ⊗R ΨE,n ) ∩ ΛE = (colimE ′ R[1/E] ⊗R ΨE ′ ,n′ ) ∩ colimE ′ ΛE ′
                                               
        = colimE ′ (R[1/E] ⊗R ΨE ′ ,n′ ) ∩ ΛE ′ = colimE ′ ΛE ′ ,n′ .
                                                                                     

5.2. Corollary. For any R-algebra A, the canonical maps
(5.2.1)                     WR,E (A) −→ lim WR,E ′ (A),
                                          ′ E
(5.2.2)                    WR,E,n (A) −→ lim WR,E ′ ,n′ (A)
                                           ′E

are isomorphisms, where E ′ , n, and n′ are as in 5.1.
5.3. Proposition. Let E ′ ∐ E ′′ be a partition of E. Then the canonical maps
(5.3.1)                        ΛR,E ′ ⊙R ΛR,E ′′ −→ ΛR,E
(5.3.2)                   ΛR,E ′ ,n′ ⊙R ΛR,E ′′ ,n′′ −→ ΛR,E,n
are isomorphisms, where n′ and n′′ denote the restrictions to E ′ and E ′′ of a given
element n ∈ N(E) .
Proof. It is enough to show each map becomes an isomorphism after base change
to R[1/E ′ ] and R[1/E ′′ ]. So, by (1.20.1), we can assume every element in either E ′
or E ′′ is the unit ideal.
   In the second case, we have
                                                ′′               ′′
               ΛE ′ ⊙R ΛE ′′ = ΛE ′ ⊙R R[N(E ) ] = ΛE ′ [N(E ) ] = ΛE
26                                           J. BORGER

                                                                                       ′′
The argument for (5.3.2) is the same, but we replace the generating set N(E ) with
[0, n′′ ].
    Now suppose every element in E ′ is the unit ideal. Then a ΛE ′ -ring is the same
as a ΨE ′ -ring. So we have
                                                           ′
                              ΛE ′ ⊙R ΛE ′′ = ΛE ′′ [N(E ) ] = ΛE .
                          ′
For (5.3.2), replace N(E ) with [0, n′ ], as above.                                         

5.4. Corollary. Let E ′ ∐ E ′′ be a partition of E. Then for any R-algebra A, the
canonical maps
                                                       
(5.4.1)               WR,E (A) −→ WR,E ′′ WR,E ′ (A)
                                                             
(5.4.2)             WR,E,n (A) −→ WR,E ′′ ,n′′ WR,E ′ ,n′ (A)
are isomorphisms, where n, n′ , n′′ are as in 5.3.
5.5. Remark. By the results above, it is safe to say that expressions such as
(5.5.1)           Λm 1 ⊙R · · · ⊙ R Λm r        and     Wmr ◦ · · · ◦ Wm1 (A)
are independent of the ordering of the mi , assuming the mi are pairwise coprime.
(Note that it is not generally true that P ⊙ P ′ ∼  = P ′ ⊙ P for plethories P and P ′ .
See [5], 2.8.)
    If we ask that the expressions in (5.5.1) be independent only up to isomorphism,
then it is not even necessary that the mα ∈ E be pairwise coprime (1.2). But
invariance up to isomorphism is not a such a useful property, and most of the time
coprimality really is necessary. For example, we could look at rings with more than
one Frobenius lift at a single maximal ideal, but we would not be able to reduce to
the case of a single Frobenius lift. Indeed, if E consists of a single maximal ideal
m, the two endomorphisms ψW W (A) and W (ψW (A) ) of W W (A) commute, and the
first is clearly a Frobenius lift, but the second is generally not. Therefore W W (A)
cannot be the cofree ring with two commuting Frobenius lifts at m.
    In fact, I believe this is the only place where we use the coprimality assumption
directly. The rest of our results depend on it only through 5.3. Although I know of
no applications, it would be interesting to know whether the abstract set up of this
paper, and then the main results, hold when we allow more than one Frobenius lift
at each maximal ideal.

                               6. Basic affine properties
   This section provides some basic results about the commutative algebra of Witt
vectors. They are just the ones needed to be able to prove the main theorems in
sections 8 and 9 and to set up the global theory in [4]. There are other basic results
that could have been included here, but which I have put off to [4], where they will
be proved for all algebraic spaces.
   We continue with the notation of 1.2. Fix an element n ∈ N(E) . We will often
write Wn = WE,n = WR,E,n and so on, for short. By 5.2, we may assume that E
agrees with the support of n, and in particular that it is finite.
6.1. Proposition. Let R′ be an E-flat R-algebra such that the structure map R →
R′ is a ring epimorphism (as in 1.20). Then the composition
                              (2.6.3)
                                        / WR,E,n (R′ ⊗R A)(2.6.2) / WR′ ,E ′ ,n (R′ ⊗R A)
                                                                   −1

      R′ ⊗R WR,E,n (A)                                         ∼

is an isomorphism, where E ′ is as in 1.20.
                      THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                               27


Proof. We may assume by 5.4 that E consists of a single ideal m. Using 4.1 and
the flatness of R′ over R, we are reduced to showing that the functors WR[1/m],m,n ,
WRm ,m,n , and WKm ,m,n commute with the functor R′ ⊗R −. Therefore we may
assume that the ideal m is principal.
   Write Wn = WR,m,n . The result is clear for n = 0, because W0 is the identity
functor. So assume n ⩾ 1. By 4.4, we have the following map of exact sequences
                                             1

 0         / R′ ⊗R m ⊗R Wn−1 (A) idR′ ⊗V / R′ ⊗R Wn (A)              / R ′ ⊗R A        /0


                                       V1
                                                     
 0         / m ⊗R Wn−1 (R′ ⊗R A)             / Wn (R′ ⊗R A)          / R ′ ⊗R A        / 0,

where the vertical maps are given by (2.6.3). By induction the leftmost vertical
arrow is an isomorphism. Therefore the inner one is, too.                     

6.2. Proposition. For any ideal I in an R-algebra A, let WR,E,n (I) denote the
kernel of the canonical map WR,E,n (A) → WR,E,n (A/I). Then we have
                          WR,E,n (I)WR,E,n (J) ⊆ WR,E,n (IJ)
for any ideals I, J in A.
Proof. Let us first show that we may assume E consists of a single ideal m. In doing
this, it will be convenient to prove the following equivalent form of the statement:
if IJ ⊆ K, where K is an ideal in A, then Wn (I)Wn (J) ⊆ Wn (K). Suppose
E = E ′ ∐ {m}. Let n′ be the restriction of n to E. Let I ′ = WE ′ ,n′ (I), J ′ =
WE ′ ,n′ (J), and K ′ = WE ′ ,n′ (K). By 5.4, we have WE,n = Wm,nm ◦ WE ′ ,n′ , and
hence WE,n (I) = Wm,nm (I ′ ) and so on. By induction, we have I ′ J ′ ⊆ K ′ , and then
applying the result in the single-ideal case gives
        WE,n (I)WE,n (J) = Wm,nm (I ′ )Wm,nm (J ′ ) = Wm,nm (K ′ ) = WE,n (K).
So we will assume E = {m} and drop E from the notation.
    By 6.1, the statement is Zariski local on R, and so we may assume the ideal m
is generated by some element π. We will work with Witt components relative to π.
    We need to show that for any elements x = (x0 , . . . , xn )π ∈ Wn (I) and y =
(y0 , . . . , yn )π ∈ Wn (J), the product xy is in Wn (IJ). So it is sufficient to show this
in the universal case, where A is the free polynomial algebra R[x0 , y0 , . . . , xn , yn ],
I is the ideal (x0 , . . . , xn ), and J is the ideal (y0 , . . . , yn ).
    Consider the following commutative diagram
                                             w⩽n
                               Wn (A)                 / A[0,n]


                                            w⩽n
                                                          
                             Wn (A/IJ)             / (A/IJ)[0,n] .

We want to show that the image of xy in Wn (A/IJ) is zero. Since A/IJ is flat
(even free) over R, the lower map w⩽n is injective, and so it is enough to show the
image of xy in (A/IJ)[0,n] is zero. But by the naturality of the ghost map, we have
w⩽n (x) ∈ I [0,n] and w⩽n (y) ∈ J [0,n] . Therefore w⩽n (xy) lies in (IJ)[0,n] , which
maps to zero in (A/IJ)[0,n] .                                                       

6.3. Remark. Although the proof of 6.2 given above uses some properties specific
to Witt vector functors, the result is true for any representable ring-valued functor.
See Borger–Wieland [5], 5.5.
28                                     J. BORGER


6.4. Corollary. Let I be an ideal in an R-algebra A. If I m = 0, then WR,E,n (I)m =
0.
6.5. Proposition. Let ϕ : A → B be a map of R-algebras. If it is surjective, then
so is the map WR,E,n (ϕ) : WR,E,n (A) → WR,E,n (B).
Proof. By 5.4, we may assume E consists of one ideal m. Since surjectivity can be
checked Zariski locally on R, it is enough by 6.1 to assume m is principal. Then
using the Witt components, we can identify the set map underlying WR,E,n (ϕ) with
the map ϕ[0,n] : A[0,n] → B [0,n] , which is clearly surjective.               

6.6. Corollary. If ϕ : A → B is surjective, then
                                 Wn (pr1 )              Wn (ϕ)
                                            /
               WR,E,n (A ×B A)             / WR,E,n (A)        / WR,E,n (B)
                                 Wn (pr2 )

is a coequalizer diagram.
Proof. The functor Wn is representable, and hence commutes with limits. (See 2.4.)
Therefore Wn (A ×B A) agrees with Wn (A) ×Wn (B) Wn (A), which is an equivalence
relation on Wn (A), the quotient by which is the image of Wn (ϕ). By 6.5, this is all
of Wn (B).                                                                         

6.7. Remark. This result is particularly appealing when A is E-flat and B is not.
Then we can describe Wn (B) in terms of Wn (A) and Wn (A ×B A), which are
directly accessible because A and A ×B A are E-flat.
6.8. Proposition. Suppose E consists of one ideal m, and let A be an R-algebra.
For any i ⩾ 0, the map Spec(id ⊗ w̄i ) of schemes induced by the ring map
                id ⊗ w̄i : R/m ⊗R WR,E,n (A) −→ R/m ⊗R A/mn+1
is a universal homeomorphism. For i = 0, it is a closed immersion defined by a
square-zero ideal.
Proof. Write Wn = WR,E,n and so on. Consider the diagram
                                          id⊗w̄i
                   R/m ⊗R Wn (A)                      / R/m ⊗R A/mn+1 A

                            id⊗w0                       r⊗a7→ra ∼
                                                qi            
                                          x7→x
                        A/mA                               / A/mA.

To show it commutes, it is enough to assume m is principal, generated by π. Then
commutativity follows from the obvious congruence
                            i       i−1                        i
                 wi (a) = aq0 + πa1q      + . . . + π i ai ≡ aq0 mod mA,
for any element a = (a0 , a1 , . . .)π ∈ W (A).
   Therefore, id ⊗ w̄i is the composition of a map whose kernel is a nil ideal and
a power of the Frobenius map. The scheme maps induced by both of these are
universal homeomorphisms.
   Now let us show that id ⊗ w0 (which equals id ⊗ w̄0 ) is a surjection with square-
zero kernel. The map id⊗w0 is surjective by 1.21 (or 4.4). So let us show the square
of its kernel is zero. By 4.4, the kernel of the map Wn (A) → R/m ⊗R A is the ideal
                                                                2
V 1 Wn (A) + mWn (A). Hence it is enough to show V 1 Wn (A) ⊆ mWn (A). This
follows from (4.2.6).                                                              
                     THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                           29


6.9. Proposition. Let (Bi )i∈I be a family of A-algebras such that the induced map
`
  i Spec Bi → Spec A is surjective. Then the induced map
                    a
                        Spec WR,E,n (Bi ) → Spec WR,E,n (A)
                        i
is surjective.
Proof. By 5.4, it is enough to assume E consists of one ideal m. Further, it is
enough to show surjectivity after base change to R[1/m] and to R/m. For R[1/m],
it follows from 6.1 and the equality Wn (C) = C [0,n] , when m is the unit ideal.
Now consider base change to R/m. By 6.8, the ring Wn (A)/mWn (A) is a nilpotent
extension
      ` of A/mA, and likewise for each Bi , and so we are reduced to showing
that i Spec Bi /mBi → Spec A/mA is surjective. This is true since base change
distributes over disjoint unions and preserves surjectivity.                  
6.10. Proposition. The R-algebra ΛR,E,n is finitely presented, and the functor
WR,E,n preserves filtered colimits of R-algebras.
Proof. Since WR,E,n is represented by ΛR,E,n , the two statements to be proved are
equivalent. By 5.4, we may assume E consists of a single ideal m. By EGA IV
2.7.1 [13], the first statement can be verified fpqc locally on R, and in particular
after base change to R[1/m] and to Rm . Therefore by (2.6.1), we can assume m is
generated by a single element π. But by 3.3, the R-algebra ΛR,E,n is generated by
the finite set θπ,0 , . . . , θπ,n .                                              

                            7. Some general descent
    The purpose of this section is to record some facts about descent of étale algebras
which we will use to prove the main theorem (9.2). The results mention nothing
about Witt vectors or anything else in this paper. So it would be reasonable to
skip this section and refer back to it only as needed.
    More precisely, we do the following. First, we set up some language and notation
for descent. This is essentially a repetition of parts of Grothendieck’s TDTE I [15].
(It could not be anything but.) Second, we prove an abstract result (7.10) relating
gluing data and descent data for certain simple gluing constructions. Third, we
recall Grothendieck’s theorem (7.11) on integral descent of étale maps. Finally, we
prove 7.12, which provides the plan of the proof of 9.2. Aside from the language of
descent, only these three results will be used outside this section.

Language

7.1. Fibered categories. Let C be a category with fibered products. Let E be a
category fibered over C. (See [15], A.1.1, or [1], VI.6.1.) For any object S of C,
let ES denote the fiber of E over S. Let us say that a map q : T → S in C is
an E-equivalence if q ∗ : ES → ET is an equivalence of categories, and let us say
that q is a universal E-equivalence if for any map S ′ → S in C, the base change
q ′ : S ′ ×S T → S ′ is an E-equivalence.
     For the applications in the next section, the reader can take
            C = the category of affine schemes,
(7.1.1)     E = the fibered category over C where ES is the category of affine
                 étale S-schemes and the functors q ∗ are given by base change.
Then any closed immersion defined by a nil ideal is a universal E-equivalence (EGA
IV 18.1.2 [14]).
30                                      J. BORGER


7.2. Composition notation. Let S be an object of C, and let CS×S denote the
category of objects over S × S. That is, an object of CS×S is a pair (T, πT ), where
T is an object of C and πT is a map T → S × S, called its structure map; a
morphism is a morphism in C commuting with the maps to S × S. For such an
object, let πT,1 , πT,2 denote the composition of the structure map T → S × S with
the projections pr1 , pr2 : S × S → S. (πT,1 is the ‘source,’ and πT,2 is the ‘target’.)
We will often abusively leave πT implicit and say that T is an object of C.
   Let 1S denote the object (S, ∆) of CS×S , where ∆ : S → S × S is the diagonal
map.
   Given two objects T, U ∈ CS×S , define T U ∈ CS×S as follows. As an object of
C, it is the fibered product
                                             pr1
(7.2.1)                             TU                 /T
                                  pr2                       πT ,2
                                           πT ,1         
                                     U                 / S.

We give T U the structure of an object of CS×S with the map

                                          (πT ,1 ◦pr1 ,πU,2 ◦pr2 )
(7.2.2)              T U = T ×S U                                    / S × S.


7.3. Category objects and equivalence relations. A category object over S is an
object R ∈ CS×S together with maps

(7.3.1)                     eR : 1S → R,           cR : RR → R

in CS×S (called identity and composition) satisfying the usual identity and associa-
tivity axioms in the definition of a category.
   A morphism f : R → R′ of such category objects defined to be a morphism in
CS×S satisfying the functor axioms, that is, such that

                      f ◦ eR = eR ◦ f      and cR′ ◦ f f = f ◦ cR ,

where f f denotes the map RR → R′ R′ induced by f .
   A category-object structure on a subobject R ⊆ S × S is a property of R in that
when it exists, it is unique. One might say that R is a reflexive transitive relation
on S. We say R is an equivalence relation on S if, in addition, the endomorphism
(pr2 , pr1 ) of S × S that switches the two factors restricts to a map

                                        s: R → R

(which is of course unique when it exists).

7.4. Pre-actions (gluing data). Let T be an object of CS×S . A pre-action of T on
an object X ∈ ES is defined to be an isomorphism
                                    ∗           ∗  ∼
(7.4.1)                        ϕ : πT,2 (X) −→ πT,1 (X)

in ET . A pre-action is also called a gluing datum on X relative to the pair of maps
(πT,1 , πT,2 ). (Actually, Grothendieck [15], A.1.4, calls ϕ−1 the gluing datum.) Let
PreAct(T, X) denote the set of pre-actions of T on X. Any map T → T ′ in CS×S
naturally induces a map

                          PreAct(T ′ , X) −→ PreAct(T, X).
                        THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                                               31


   If f : X → X ′ is a morphism in ES between objects X, X ′ with pre-actions ϕ, ϕ′ ,
then we say f is T -equivariant if the following diagram commutes:
                                                   ∗
                                                  πT ,2 (f )
                                  ∗                            / π ∗ (X ′ )
                                 πT,2 (X)                         T,2

                                        ϕ                              ϕ′

                                                  ∗                  
                                                  πT ,1 (f )
                                  ∗                            / π ∗ (X ′ ).
                                 πT,1  (X)                        T,1

In this way, the objects of ES equipped with a pre-action of T form a category.

7.5. Actions. Now let R be a category object over S. An action of R on X is
defined to be a pre-action ϕ of R on X such that the diagram
                                                     ∗
                                                      e (ϕ)
                               e∗ πR,2
                                   ∗
                                       (X)                         / e∗ π ∗ (X)
                                                                           R,1
                                        ❄
                                        ❄❄❄❄                            ⑧⑧
                                           ❄❄❄❄                        ⑧⑧
                                              ❄❄❄❄                   ⑧⑧⑧
                                                 ❄❄❄❄          ⑧
                                                               ⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧
                                                    ❄❄❄       ⑧
                                                          ⑧⑧⑧⑧⑧
                                                       ∗
                                                    idS (X)

and the diagram
                                                   c∗ (ϕ)
                                 c∗ πR,2
                                       ∗
                                          (X)                  / c∗ π ∗ (X)
                                                                     R,1
                                qq                                         ▼▼▼▼
                            qqqq                                                ▼▼
                                                                                   ▼▼▼
                      qqqqq                                                            ▼▼▼
                     q                                                                    ▼▼▼▼▼
                 qqqq
      pr∗2 πR,2
            ∗
                (X)                                                                         pr∗1 πR,1
                                                                                                  ∗
                                                                                                      (X)
                  ▼▼▼                                                                      q q8
                      ▼▼▼pr∗ (ϕ)                                                 ∗
                                                                              pr1 (ϕ) qq q
                         ▼▼2▼                                                       qq
                             ▼▼▼
                                 ▼▼&                                         qq qqq
                                                                          qq
                                 pr∗2 πR,1
                                        ∗
                                           (X)                 pr∗1 πR,2
                                                                      ∗
                                                                         (X),

commute. Here, pr1 and pr2 denote the projections RR → R onto the first and sec-
ond factors, and the morphisms represented by equality signs are the isomorphisms
                                                    ∼
induced by the canonical structure maps (g ◦ f )∗ → f ∗ ◦ g ∗ (notated cf,g in [15],
A.1.1(ii)) of the fibered category E corresponding to the equalities

                                     πR,2 ◦ e = idS = πR,1 ◦ e

and

        πR,2 ◦ c = πR,2 ◦ pr2 ,       πR,1 ◦ pr2 = πR,2 ◦ pr1 ,             πR,1 ◦ c = πR,1 ◦ pr1 .

We will often use the following more succinct, if slightly abusive, expressions of the
commutativity of the diagrams above:

(7.5.1)                    e∗ (ϕ) = idX ,        c∗ (ϕ) = (pr∗1 ϕ) ◦ (pr∗2 ϕ).

   Let Act(R, X) denote the set of actions of R on X. A morphism R → R′ of
category objects induces a map

                                    Act(R′ , X) −→ Act(R, X)

in the obvious way.
32                                        J. BORGER


     Last, note that if R is an equivalence relation, then the diagram

                                             s∗ (ϕ)
                            s∗ πR,2
                                ∗
                                    (X)               / s∗ π ∗ (X)
                                                            R,1




                              ∗               ϕ−1
                             πR,1 (X)                     / π∗ .
                                                             R,2


commutes. This follows immediately from (7.5.1). The abbreviated version is

(7.5.2)                                  s∗ (ϕ) = ϕ−1 .

7.6. Descent data. Let q : S ′ → S be a map in C, and put

                                  R(S ′ /S) = S ′ ×S S ′ .

View R(S ′ /S) as an object in CS ′ ×S ′ by taking πR(S ′ /S) to be the evident monomor-
phism
                           R(S ′ /S) = S ′ ×S S ′ −→ S ′ × S ′
Then R(S ′ /S) is an equivalence relation on S ′ . An action ϕ of R(S ′ /S) on an
object X ′ of ES ′ is also called a descent datum on X ′ from S ′ to S. (Again, it is
actually ϕ−1 that is called the descent datum in [15].) We might call R(S ′ /S) the
descent, or Galois, groupoid of the map q : S ′ → S.
    Because the two compositions R(S ′ /S) = S ′ ×S S ′ ⇒ S ′ → S are equal, for any
object X ∈ ES , the object q ∗ (X) of ES ′ has a canonical pre-action of R(S ′ /S), and
it is easy to check that this is an action. We say that q is a descent map for the
fibered category E if the functor from ES to the category of objects of ES ′ with an
R-action is fully faithful. We say it is an effective descent map if it is an equivalence.

7.7. When gluing data is descent data. Now suppose we have a diagram

                                  S ′′        / S′
                                               /
(7.7.1)                                                   /S

in C such that the two compositions S ′′ ⇒ S are equal. The universal property of
products gives a map
                             S ′′ −→ S ′ ×S S ′ = R(S ′ /S).
For any object X ′ ∈ ES ′ , this map induces a function

                        Act(R(S ′ /S), X ′ ) −→ PreAct(S ′′ , X ′ ).

Let us say that gluing data on X ′ is descent data relative to the diagram (7.7.1)
when this map is a bijection.

Gluing two objects

   Here we spell out in perhaps excessive detail some basic facts about equivalence
relations on disjoint unions which are E-trivial (though not necessarily trivial) on
each factor.
   From now on, let C denote the category of affine schemes, schemes, or algebraic
spaces. (We only need some weak hypotheses on coproducts in C, but let us not
bother to determine which ones we need.)
                     THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                             33


7.8. Equivalence relations on a disjoint union. Suppose S is a coproduct Sa + Sb
of two objects Sa , Sb ∈ C. (We use the symbols a, b to index the summands only
to emphasize their distinction from the symbols 1, 2 that index the factors in the
product S × S.) Let R be an equivalence relation on S, and let Rij denote R ×S×S
(Si × Sj ), for any i, j ∈ {a, b}. Let πRij ,1 denote the evident composition
                                                     1       pr
                            Rij = R ×S×S (Si × Sj ) −→ Si
and πRij ,2 the analogous map Rij → Sj . We will sometimes view Rij as an object
of CS×S using the induced map Rij → Si × Sj → S × S.
   Let ei : Si → Rii and cijk : Rij Rjk → Rik and sij : Rij → Rji denote the evident
restrictions of e and c and s.
7.9. Actions over a disjoint union. For any object X over S, write Xa = Sa ×S X
and Xb = Sb ×S X.
   For any pre-action
                                       ∗         ∗
(7.9.1)                           ϕ : πR,2 X −→ πR,1 X,
of R on X, let us write ϕij for the restriction of ϕ to Rij . In order for this pre-action
to be an action, it is necessary and sufficient that for all i, j, k ∈ {a, b} we have
(7.9.2)                       e∗i (ϕii ) = idXi and
(7.9.3)                     c∗ijk (ϕik ) = pr∗1 (ϕij ) ◦ pr∗2 (ϕjk ).
This is just a restatement of (7.5.1), summand by summand. In that case, 7.5.2
becomes
(7.9.4)                               s∗ij (ϕji ) = ϕ−1
                                                     ij .

7.10. Proposition. Let R be an equivalence relation on S = Sa + Sb such that for
i = a, b, the map ei : Si → Rii is a universal E-equivalence. Then for any object
X ∈ ES , the map
                                    ϕ7→ϕba
                        Act(R, X)          / PreAct(Rba , X)
is a bijection.
Proof. Let us first show injectivity. Let ϕ and ϕ′ be actions of R on X such that
ϕba = ϕ′ba . We need to show that this implies ϕij = ϕ′ij for all i, j ∈ {a, b}.
Consider each case separately. For ij = ba, it is true by assumption. When ij = ab,
equation (7.9.4) and the given equality ϕba = ϕ′ba , imply
                        ϕab = s∗ba (ϕab )−1 = s∗ba (ϕ′ab )−1 = ϕ′ab .
When i = j, since ei is an E-equivalence, it is enough to show e∗i (ϕii ) = e∗i (ϕ′ii ).
But by (7.9.2), we have
                            e∗i (ϕii ) = idXi = e∗i (ϕ′ii ).
                ′
Therefore ϕ = ϕ , which proves injectivity.
  Now consider surjectivity. Let ϕba be a pre-action of Rba on X. Define
(7.10.1)                             ϕab = s∗ab (ϕba )−1
and for i = a, b define ϕii to be the map such that
(7.10.2)                              e∗i (ϕii ) = idXi ,
which exists and is unique because ei is an E-equivalence. We need to check that
the pre-action ϕ = ϕaa + ϕab + ϕba + ϕbb of R on X is actually an action. To do
this, we will verify the relations (7.9.2) and (7.9.3).
   The identity axiom (7.9.2) holds because it is the defining property (7.10.2) of
ϕii .
34                                             J. BORGER


   Now consider the associativity axiom (7.9.3) for the various possibilities for ijk.
Since i, j, k ∈ {a, b}, two of i, j, k must be equal.
   If i = j, the composition f
                                      pr−1
                                        2                 ej ×id
                               Rjk        ∼
                                              / Sjj Rjk            / Rjj Rjk

is an E-equivalence, because it is a base change of the universal E-equivalence ej .
Therefore it is enough to show
(7.10.3)                  f ∗ c∗jjk (ϕjk ) = f ∗ pr∗1 (ϕjj ) ◦ f ∗ pr∗2 (ϕjk ).
By the equality pr1 ◦ f = ej ◦ πRjk ,1 and (7.10.2), we have
                    f ∗ pr∗1 (ϕjj ) = πR
                                       ∗
                                              e∗ (ϕjj ) = πR
                                         jk ,1 j
                                                           ∗
                                                             jk ,1
                                                                   (idXj ) = id.
On the other hand, by cjjk ◦ f = idRjk = pr2 ◦ f , we have f ∗ c∗jjk (ϕjk ) = f ∗ pr∗2 (ϕjk ).
Equation (7.10.3) then follows.
  The case j = k is similar to the case i = j. (Or apply s to the case i = j.)
  Last, suppose i = k. The following diagram is easily checked to be cartesian:
                                                (idRij ,sij )
(7.10.4)                              Rij                       / Rij Rji

                                πRij ,1                                  ciji

                                                    ei                
                                      Si                            / Rii .

(This is just another expression of the existence and uniqueness of inverses in a
groupoid.) Since ei is a universal E-equivalence, (idRij , sij ) is an E-equivalence. So
it is enough to show axiom (7.9.3) after applying (idRij , sij )∗ , that is, to show
(7.10.5)      (idRij , sij )∗ c∗iji (ϕii ) = (idRij , sij )∗ pr∗1 (ϕij ) ◦ (idRij , sij )∗ pr∗2 (ϕji ).
By the commutativity of (7.10.4) and (7.10.2), we have
               (idRij , sij )∗ c∗iji (ϕii ) = πR
                                               ∗
                                                      e∗ (ϕii ) = πR
                                                 ij ,1 i
                                                                   ∗
                                                                     ij ,1
                                                                           (idXi ) = id.
Combining this with the equation ϕji = s∗ji (ϕij )−1 , equation (7.10.5) reduces to
                     (idRij , sij )∗ pr∗1 (ϕij ) = (idRij , sij )∗ pr∗2 s∗ji (ϕij ).
But this holds because we have
             pr1 ◦ (idRij , sij ) = idRij = sji ◦ sij = sji ◦ pr2 ◦ (idRij , sij ).
   Therefore the equations in (7.9.3) hold for all i, j, k, and so the pre-action is an
action.                                                                               


Grothendieck’s theorem
   Recall that a map Spec B → Spec A of affine schemes is said to be integral if the
corresponding ring map A → B is integral (and not necessarily injective).
7.11. Theorem. Every surjective integral map Y → X of affine schemes is an
effective descent map for the fibered category E over C of (7.1.1).
   This theorem is proven in SGA 1 IX 4.7 [1] up to two details. First, the argument
given there covers only morphisms Y → X which are finite and of finite presentation;
and second, the statement there has no affineness in the assumptions or in the
conclusion. The first point can be handled by a standard limiting argument (or
one can apply Theorem 5.17 plus Remark 2.5(1b) in Rydh [22]). The second point
can be handled with Chevalley’s theorem; the form most convenient here would the
                     THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                            35


final one, Rydh’s [21] Theorem (8.1), which is free of noetherianness, separatedness,
finiteness, and scheme-theoretic assumptions.

Gluing and descent of étale algebras

7.12. Proposition. Consider a diagram of rings
                                                      h1
                                       d       / B′         /
(7.12.1)                         BO               O        / BO ′′
                                                      h2
                                e              e′               e′′
                                                      g1
                                               / A′         /
                                 A
                                       f
                                                           / A′′
                                                      g2

such that hi ◦ e′ = e′′ ◦ gi , for i = 1, 2. Also assume the following properties are
satisfied:
    (a) the two parallel right-hand squares are cocartesian,
    (b) both rows are equalizer diagrams,
    (c) relative to the lower row, gluing data on any étale A′ -algebra is descent data,
    (d) f satisfies effective descent for the fibered category of étale algebras, and
    (e) e′ is étale.
Then e is étale and the left-hand square is cocartesian.
   Note that when we use the language of descent in the category of rings (as in
(c) and (d)), we understand that it refers to the corresponding statements in the
opposite category.
Proof. Property (a) equips the étale A′ -algebra B ′ with gluing data ϕ relative to
(g1 , g2 ). Indeed, take ϕ to be the composition
                                           ∼          ∼
                        A′′ ⊗g1 ,A′ B ′ −→ B ′′ −→ A′′ ⊗g2 ,A′ B ′ .
By property (c), this gluing data comes from unique descent data relative to f .
Therefore by (d) and (e), the A′ -algebra B ′ descends to an étale A-algebra C.
   Now apply the functor C ⊗A − to the lower row of diagram (7.12.1). By (a) and
the definition of descent, the result can be identified with the sequence
                                                      h1
                                               / B′         /
                                 C                         / B ′′ .
                                                      h2

This sequence is also an equalizer diagram, because the lower row of (7.12.1) is an
equalizer diagram, by (b), and because C is étale over A and hence flat. Again
by (b), the upper row of (7.12.1) is an equalizer diagram, and so we have C = B.
Therefore, B is an étale A-algebra and the left-hand square is cocartesian.      

                 8. Ghost descent in the single-prime case
  We return to the notation of 1.2. Suppose E consists of a single maximal ideal m,
and fix an integer n ⩾ 1. Write Wn = WR,m,n , and so on. Let A be an R-algebra,
and let αn denote the map
                                           α
(8.0.2)                       Wn (A) −−n→ Wn−1 (A) × A
given by the canonical projection on the factor Wn−1 (A) and the n-th ghost com-
ponent wn on the factor A. Let In (A) denote the kernel of αn . For example, if m
is generated by π, then in terms of the Witt components, we have
(8.0.3)              In (A) = {(0, . . . , 0, a)π ∈ A[0,n] | π n a = 0}.
8.1. Proposition. We have the following:
36                                         J. BORGER


      (a) αn is an integral ring homomorphism.
      (b) The kernel In (A) of αn is a square-zero ideal.
      (c) If A is m-flat, then αn is injective.
      (d) The diagram
                                             w̄n
                                Wn−1 (A)         / A/mn A
                                      OO              OO

                                                  wn
                                    Wn (A)               / A,
          where the vertical maps are the canonical ones, is cocartesian.
      (e) View A as a Wn (A)-algebra by the map wn : Wn (A) → A. Then every
          element of the kernel of the multiplication map
                                       A ⊗Wn (A) A −→ A
          is nilpotent.
      (f) In the diagram
                                                          w̄n ◦pr1
                                  αn
                                                                  / A/mn A,
                                       / Wn−1 (A) × A              /
(8.1.1)                 Wn (A)
                                                            pr2

          where pr2 denotes the reduction of pr2 modulo mn , the image of αn agrees
          with the equalizer of w̄n ◦ pr1 and pr2 .
Proof. (a): It is enough to show that each factor of Wn−1 (A) × A is integral over
Wn (A). The first factor is a quotient ring, and hence integral. Now consider an
                           n
element a ∈ A. Then aq is the image in A of the Teichmüller lift [a] ∈ Wn (A).
(See 1.21.) Therefore the second factor is also integral over Wn (A).
   (b): It suffices to show this after base change to R[1/m] × Rm . Therefore, by 6.1,
we may assume m is generated by a single element π. Then an element of the kernel
of αn will be of the form Vπn [a] = (0, . . . , 0, a)π , where π n a = 0. On the other hand,
by (4.2.6) we have
                  (Vπn [a])(Vπn [b]) = π n Vπn [ab] = (0, . . . , 0, π n ab)π = 0.
   (c): We have (w⩽n−1 × idA ) ◦ αn = w⩽n . Since A is m-flat, the map w⩽n is
injective (2.7), and hence so is αn .
   (d): As above, it is enough by 6.1 to assume m is generated by a single element
π. Then we have
      A ⊗Wn (A) Wn−1 (A) = A ⊗Wn (A) Wn (A)/V n Wn (A) = A/wn (V n Wn (A))A.
Examining the Witt polynomials (3.1.1) shows wn (V n Wn (A)) = π n A.
   (e): Again, by 6.1 we may assume m is generated by a single element π. To show
every element x ∈ I is nilpotent, it is enough to restrict x to a set of generators.
                                                     n
Therefore it is enough to show (1 ⊗ a − a ⊗ 1)q = 0 for every element a ∈ A.
   Now suppose that, for j = 0, . . . , q n , we could show
                                 n
                                   q
(8.1.2)                                   aj ∈ im(wn ).
                                    j
Then we would have
                                    n
                    n      X         q         n
     (1 ⊗ a − a ⊗ 1)q =        (−1)j    aj ⊗ aq −j
                           j
                                      j
                                              n
                                   X          q        n                     n
                                 =   (−1)j ⊗      aj aq −j = (1 ⊗ a − 1 ⊗ a)q = 0,
                                   j
                                               j

which would complete the proof. So let us show (8.1.2).
                     THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                             37


   Let f = ordp (q) and i = ordp (j). Then we have
                      n                        n        
                      q             n −1          q −1
                ordp      = ordp (q j ) + ordp                ⩾ nf − i.
                       j                           j−1
                  n
It follows that qj aj is an R-linear multiple of π nf −i aj . Since wn is an R-algebra
map, it is therefore enough to show
(8.1.3)                             π nf −i aj ∈ im(wn ).
                                                            s
   Now, for b ∈ A and s = 0, . . . , n, we have π n−s bq = wn (Vπn−s [b]), and therefore
  n−s qs
π     b is in the image of wn . So to show (8.1.3), it is enough to find an integer
                                                   s
s and an element b ∈ A such that π n−s bq is an R-linear divisor of π nf −i aj . In
                                                           s
particular, it is sufficient for b and s to satisfy bq = aj and n − s ⩽ nf − i.
   Take s to be the greatest integer at most if −1 . Then we have q s | j; so if we
             s                     s
set b = aj/q ∈ A, we have bq = aj . It remains to show n − s ⩽ nf − i. This is
equivalent to n − if −1 ⩽ nf − i, which is in turn equivalent to (1 − f )(n − if −1 ) ⩽ 0.
And this holds because 1 − f ⩽ 0 and n − if −1 ⩾ 0. (Recall that j ⩽ q n .) This
completes the proof of (e).
   (f): As above, we may assume that m can be generated by a single element π.
For any element a = (a0 , . . . , an )π ∈ Wn (A), we have
                                                 n
                                                                               
               αn (a) = (a0 , . . . , an−1 ), aq0 + · · · + π n−1 aqn−1 + π n an .
                                               
Therefore an element (a0 , . . . , an−1 ), b ∈ Wn−1 (A) × A lies in the image of αn if
and only if
                          n
                        aq0 + · · · + π n−1 aqn−1 ≡ b mod mn A,
which is exactly what we needed to show.                                               

8.2. Corollary. For any R-algebra A, the ghost map
                                w⩽n : Wn (A) −→ A[0,n]
                                            n
is integral, and its kernel J satisfies J 2 = 0.
Proof. By 8.1 and induction on n.                                                      

8.3. Theorem.        (a) The map αn is an effective descent map for the fibered
       category of étale algebras.
   (b) Relative to the diagram
                                                      w̄n ◦pr1
                               αn
                                                                / A/mn A,
                                                                 /
(8.3.1)              Wn (A)          / Wn−1 (A) × A
                                                        pr2

        gluing data on any étale Wn−1 (A) × A-algebra is descent data (7.7).
    (c) If A is m-flat, then for any A′ -algebra B ′ equipped with gluing data ϕ, the
        descended A-algebra is the subring B of B ′ on which the following diagram
        commutes:
                                       A/mn A ⊗w̄n ◦pr1 B ′
                                 1⊗idB ′ ♥♥♥
                                            ♥6     O
                                    ♥ ♥♥
                                   ♥
                                ♥♥♥
                            B ′ PP               ϕ
                                  PPP
                                     PPP
                                          P
                                 1⊗idB ′ PPP
                                               (
                                         A/mn A ⊗pr2 B ′ .
38                                      J. BORGER


Proof. (a): This follows from Grothendieck’s theorem 7.11 and 8.1(a)–(b).
    (b): We will use 7.10, where C and E are as in (7.1.1). In the notation of 7.8, put
Sa = Spec Wn (A) and Sb = Spec A. Let Γ be the equivalence relation S ×Spec Wn (A)
S on S. By 8.1(d), we have Γba = Spec A/mn A. The map ea is an isomorphism
because Wn−1 (A) is a quotient ring of Wn (A). The map eb is a nil immersion,
by 8.1(e), and hence is an E-equivalence. Thus we can apply 7.10, which says that
a Γ-action is the same as a Γba pre-action. In other words, gluing data is descent
data.
    (c): This will follow from 7.12 once we verify the hypotheses. 7.12(a)–(b) are
clear; 7.12(c) follows from (b) above; 7.12(d) follows from (a) above; and 7.12(e)
follows from the definition of B, for the top row of (7.12.1), and from 8.1(c) and
(f), for the bottom row.                                                             
8.4. Remark. For any ring C, let EtAlgC denote the category of étale C-algebras.
Then another way of expressing part (b) of this theorem is that the induced functor
                  EtAlgWn (A) −→ EtAlgWn−1 (A) ×EtAlgA/mn A EtAlgA
is an equivalence. (Of course, the fibered product of categories is taken in the weak
sense.) In particular, we can prove things about étale Wn (A)-algebras by induction
on n. This is the main technique in the proof of 9.2. But it also seems interesting
in its own right and will probably have applications beyond the present paper.
8.5. Remark. If we let W̄n (A) denote the image of αn , then the induced diagram
                                                      w̄n ◦pr1
                                                                / A/mn A.
                                                                 /
                     W̄n (A)      / Wn−1 (A) × A
                                                          pr2

satisfies all the conclusions of the theorem above, regardless of whether A is m-flat.
   Indeed, it is an equalizer diagram by 8.1(f) and the definition of W̄n (A); it is
an effective descent map by 8.3 and 8.1(b). Last, because W̄n (A) is the image of
αn , gluing (resp. descent) data relative to W̄n (A) agrees with gluing (resp. descent)
data relative to Wn (A). In particular, gluing data relative to W̄n (A) is descent
data.

                           9. W and étale morphisms
   We return to the general context of 1.2. In particular, E is no longer required
to consist of one ideal.
9.1. Lemma. Consider a commutative square of affine schemes (or any schemes)
                                           g
                                     Xo        X′
                                    f                f′
                                                
                                           h
                                     Y o       Y ′,
and let U be an open subscheme of Y . Suppose the following hold
   (a) f and f ′ are étale,
   (b) the square above becomes cartesian after the base change U ×Y −,
   (c) g and h become surjective and universally injective after the base change
        (Y − U ) ×Y −.
Then the square above is cartesian.
Proof. Let e denote the induced map (g, f ′ ) : X ′ → X ×Y Y ′ . It is enough to
show e is étale, surjective, and universally injective (EGA IV (17.9.1) [14]). The
composition of e with pr2 : X ×Y Y ′ → Y ′ is f ′ . Because f is étale, so is its base
                     THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                             39


change pr2 . Combining this with the étaleness of f ′ implies that e is étale (EGA
IV 17.3.4 [14]).
    The surjectivity and universal injectivity of e can be checked after base change
over Y to U and to Y − U . By assumption e becomes an isomorphism after base
change to U . In particular, it becomes surjective and universally injective.
    Let ē, ḡ, h̄ denote the maps e, g, h pulled back from Y to Y − U . Let h̄′ denote
the base change of h̄ from Y to X. Then, as above, we have ḡ = h̄′ ◦ ē. Since h̄
is universally injective, so is h̄′ . Combining this with the fact that ḡ is universally
injective, implies that ē is as well (EGA I 3.5.6–7 [12]). Finally ē is surjective since
h̄′ is injective and ḡ is surjective.                                                  

9.2. Theorem. For any étale map ϕ : A → B and any element n ∈ N(E) , the
induced map WR,E,n (ϕ) : WR,E,n (A) → WR,E,n (B) is étale.

Proof. By 5.4, it is enough to assume E consists of a single maximal ideal m. Also,
it will simplify notation if we assume m is principal, generated by an element π.
We may do this by by 6.1 and because it is enough to show étaleness after applying
Rm ⊗R − and R[1/m] ⊗R −. Let us write Wn = WR,E,n .
   We will reason by induction on n, the case n = 0 being clear because W0 is the
identity functor. So from now on, assume n ⩾ 1.
   Let W̄n (A) denote the image of αn : Wn (A) → Wn−1 (A) × A, and let ᾱn denote
the induced injection W̄n (A) → Wn−1 (A)×A. Define W̄n (B) and ᾱn for B similarly.
   Step 1: W̄n (B) is étale over W̄n (A).
   To do this, it suffices to verify conditions (a)–(e) of 7.12 for the following diagram

                                                         w̄n ◦pr1
                               ᾱn
                                                                    / B/mn B
                                                                     /
                     W̄n (B)         / Wn−1 (B) × B
                         O                   O             pr2           O

                                                         w̄n ◦pr1
                               ᾱn
                                                                 / A/mn A,
                                     / Wn−1 (A) × A               /
                     W̄n (A)
                                                           pr2


where the vertical maps are induced by ϕ and functoriality. We know 7.12(a) holds
by induction. Conditions 7.12(c)–(d) hold by 8.3 (or 8.5). Condition 7.12(e) was
shown already in 8.1(f). Now consider 7.12(b). It is clear that the square of pr2
maps is cocartesian. So, all that remains is to check that the square of w̄n ◦ pr1
maps is cocartesian. By induction, Wn−1 (B) is étale over Wn−1 (A), and so this
follows from 9.1, which we can apply by 6.1 and 6.8.
   Step 2: Wn (B) is étale over Wn (A).
   By 8.1(b), the kernel In (A) of the map αn : Wn (A) → W̄n (A) has square zero.
Therefore by EGA IV 18.1.2 [14], there is an étale Wn (A)-algebra C and an isomor-
phism f : C ⊗Wn (A) W̄n (A) → W̄n (B). Now consider the square

                                     CO ❏            / W̄n (B)
                                          ❏                OO
                                              ❏ d
                                                ❏
                                                    ❏❏
                                                       %
                                 Wn (A)              / Wn (B),

where the upper map is the one induced by f and where d will soon be defined.
By 8.1(b), the kernel In (B) of the right-hand map has square zero. Therefore since
C is étale over Wn (A), there exists a unique map d making the diagram commute.
Let us now show that d is an isomorphism.
40                                        J. BORGER


   Because C is étale and hence flat over Wn (A), we have a commutative diagram
with exact rows:
        0            / In (B)             / Wn (B)                        / W̄n (B)                  /0
                           O                   O                                O
                       e                     d                                 f ∼


        0       / C ⊗W (A) In (A)            /C                 / C ⊗W (A) W̄n (A)                   / 0.
                      n                                                    n


So to show d is an isomorphism, it is enough to show e is an isomorphism. Because
In (A) is a square-zero ideal, the action of Wn (A) on it factors through W̄n (A).
Therefore, e factors as follows:

     C ⊗Wn (A) In (A) = C ⊗Wn (A) W̄n (A) ⊗W̄n (A) In (A)
                                                       f ⊗id                                     g
                                                       −→ W̄n (B) ⊗W̄n (A) In (A) −→ In (B),
Since f is an isomorphism, it is enough to show g is an isomorphism.
   Using the description (8.0.3) of In , the map g can be extended to the following
commutative diagram with exact rows:
                                                                ·π n           / πn B
        0           / In (B)                     /B
                                                   O                               O
                                                                                                      /0
                          O
                      g             (pr2 ◦ᾱn )·ϕ                                    (pr2 ◦ᾱn )·ϕ
                                                                    n
                                                               ·π       / W̄n (B) ⊗ π n A,
        0      / W̄n (B) ⊗ In (A)       / W̄n (B) ⊗ A                                                 /0

where ⊗ denotes ⊗W̄n (A) , for short. Therefore it is enough to show the right two
vertical maps are isomorphisms, and to do this, it is enough to show the right-hand
square in the diagram
                                                               pr2 ◦ᾱn
                           Wn (B)           / / W̄n (B)                     /B
                              O                     O                         O


                                                               pr2 ◦ᾱn
                           Wn (A)           / / W̄n (A)                     /A

is cocartesian. We will do this by applying 9.1, with U = Spec R[1/m] ⊗R W̄n (A).
   By step 1, condition 9.1(a) holds. Now consider conditions 9.1(b)–(c). By 8.3(b),
the horizontal maps in the left-hand square have square-zero kernel. In particular,
the scheme maps they induce are universal homeomorphisms. And by 6.1, they
become isomorphisms after applying R[1/m] ⊗R −. Therefore it is enough to show
9.1(b)–(c) hold for the perimeter of the diagram above. In this case, 9.1(b) follows
from 6.1, and 9.1(c) follows from 6.8.                                            

9.3. Remark. Observe that when A is E-flat, the proof terminates after step 1,
which is just an application of 7.12. Thus in the central case, the argument is not
much more than 8.1 and some general descent theory.
9.4. Corollary. Let B an étale A-algebra, and let C be any A-algebra. Then for
any n ∈ N(E) , the induced diagram
                           WR,E,n (B)               / WR,E,n (B ⊗A C)
                               O                              O


                           WR,E,n (A)                  / WR,E,n (C)

is cocartesian.
                        THE BASIC GEOMETRY OF WITT VECTORS, I                                     41


Proof. By 5.4, we can assume E consists of a single ideal m. The proof will be
completed by 9.1, once we check its hypotheses are satisfied. Condition (a) of 9.1
holds by 9.2, condition (b) holds by 6.1 and 2.7, and condition (c) holds by 6.8. 
9.5. Wn does not generally commute with coproducts. Almost anything is an exam-
ple. For instance, with the p-typical Witt vectors, W1 (A ⊗Z A) is not isomorphic
to W1 (A) ⊗W1 (Z) W1 (A), when A is Fp [x] or Z[x].
9.6. W does not generally preserve étale maps. Let W denote p-typical Witt func-
tor (non-truncated), and let ϕ denote the evident inclusion Q[x] → Q[x±1 ], which
is étale. While W (ϕ) is best viewed as a map of pro-rings, it is possible to view
it as a map of ordinary rings, and ask whether it is étale. It is not: W (ϕ) can be
identified with ϕN : Q[x]N → Q[x±1 ]N , which is not étale because Q[x±1 ]N is not
finitely generated as an Q[x]N -algebra. This is an elementary exercise.
9.7. Other truncation sets for the big Witt vectors. Some writers have considered
more general systems of truncations for the big Witt functor (1.15). See Hesselholt–
Madsen [17], subsection 4.1, for example. Given a finite set T of positive integers
closed under extraction of divisors, they define an endofunctor WT of the category
of rings. When T consists of all the divisors of some integer d ⩾ 1, then WT agrees
with our WZ,E,n , where E consists of the maximal ideals m ⊂ Z that contain d and
where nm = ordm (d). Thus the two systems of truncations are cofinal with respect
to each other.
    The functors WT also preserve étale maps. Indeed, it is enough to show that
the base change to Z[1/T ] and to Z(p) , for each prime p ∈ T , is étale. (See EGA
IV (17.7.2)(ii).) Applying the identity WT (A)[1/p] = WT (A[1/p]), which can be
established by looking at the graded pieces of the Verschiebung filtration, it is
enough to consider Z[1/T ]-algebras and Z(p) -algebras. In the either case, WT (A)
is simply a product of p-typical Witt rings Wn (A) for various primes p and lengths
n (see [17], (4.1.10)), in which case the result follows from 9.2, or van der Kallen’s
original theorem [24], (2.4).

                                          References
 [1] Revêtements étales et groupe fondamental (SGA 1). Documents Mathématiques (Paris), 3.
     Société Mathématique de France, Paris, 2003. Séminaire de géométrie algébrique du Bois
     Marie 1960–61. Directed by A. Grothendieck, With two papers by M. Raynaud, Updated
     and annotated reprint of the 1971 original [Lecture Notes in Math., 224, Springer, Berlin].
 [2] Francis Borceux. Handbook of categorical algebra. 1, volume 50 of Encyclopedia of Mathe-
     matics and its Applications. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1994. Basic category
     theory.
 [3] Francis Borceux. Handbook of categorical algebra. 2, volume 51 of Encyclopedia of Mathe-
     matics and its Applications. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1994. Categories and
     structures.
 [4] James Borger. Basic geometry of Witt vectors, II: Spaces. To appear.
 [5] James Borger and Ben Wieland. Plethystic algebra. Adv. Math., 194(2):246–283, 2005.
 [6] N. Bourbaki. Éléments de mathématique. Algèbre commutative. Chapitres 8 et 9. Springer,
     Berlin, 2006. Reprint of the 1983 original.
 [7] Alexandru Buium. Geometry of p-jets. Duke Math. J., 82(2):349–367, 1996.
 [8] Alexandru Buium. Arithmetic differential equations, volume 118 of Mathematical Surveys
     and Monographs. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2005.
 [9] Alexandru Buium and Santiago R. Simanca. Arithmetic Laplacians. Adv. Math., 220(1):246–
     277, 2009.
[10] V. G. Drinfeld. Coverings of p-adic symmetric domains. Funkcional. Anal. i Priložen.,
     10(2):29–40, 1976.
[11] Alexander Grothendieck. La théorie des classes de Chern. Bull. Soc. Math. France, 86:137–
     154, 1958.
[12] Alexander Grothendieck. Éléments de géométrie algébrique. I. Le langage des schémas. Inst.
     Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math., (4):228, 1960.
42                                           J. BORGER


[13] Alexander Grothendieck. Éléments de géométrie algébrique. IV. Étude locale des schémas et
     des morphismes de schémas. II. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math., (24):231, 1965.
[14] Alexander Grothendieck. Éléments de géométrie algébrique. IV. Étude locale des schémas et
     des morphismes de schémas IV. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math., (32):361, 1967.
[15] Alexander Grothendieck. Technique de descente et théorèmes d’existence en géometrie
     algébrique. I. Généralités. Descente par morphismes fidèlement plats. In Séminaire Bourbaki,
     Vol. 5, pages Exp. No. 190, 299–327. Soc. Math. France, Paris, 1995.
[16] Michiel Hazewinkel. Formal groups and applications, volume 78 of Pure and Applied Mathe-
     matics. Academic Press Inc. [Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Publishers], New York, 1978.
[17] Lars Hesselholt and Ib Madsen. Cyclic polytopes and the K-theory of truncated polynomial
     algebras. Invent. Math., 130(1):73–97, 1997.
[18] André Joyal. δ-anneaux et λ-anneaux. C. R. Math. Rep. Acad. Sci. Canada, 7(4):227–232,
     1985.
[19] André Joyal. δ-anneaux et vecteurs de Witt. C. R. Math. Rep. Acad. Sci. Canada, 7(3):177–
     182, 1985.
[20] Michel Lazard. Commutative formal groups. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1975. Lecture Notes in
     Mathematics, Vol. 443.
[21] D. Rydh. Noetherian approximation of algebraic spaces and stacks. arXiv:0904.0227v1.
[22] D. Rydh. Submersions and effective descent of étale morphisms. Bull. Soc. Math. France. To
     appear.
[23] D. O. Tall and G. C. Wraith. Representable functors and operations on rings. Proc. London
     Math. Soc. (3), 20:619–643, 1970.
[24] Wilberd van der Kallen. Descent for the K-theory of polynomial rings. Math. Z., 191(3):405–
     415, 1986.
[25] Clarence Wilkerson. Lambda-rings, binomial domains, and vector bundles over CP (∞).
     Comm. Algebra, 10(3):311–328, 1982.
[26] Ernst Witt. Zyklische Körper und Algebren der Charakteristik p vom Grad pn . Struktur
     diskret bewerteter perfekter Körper mit vollkommenem Restklassen-körper der charakteristik
     p. J. Reine Angew. Math., (176), 1937.
[27] Ernst Witt. Collected papers. Gesammelte Abhandlungen. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1998. With
     an essay by Günter Harder on Witt vectors, Edited and with a preface in English and German
     by Ina Kersten.

     Australian National University
     E-mail address: james.borger@anu.edu.au
