                                                                               LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS


                                                                                 PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH




arXiv:1902.03719v8 [math.CO] 17 Jul 2024
                                                   A BSTRACT. We study the class of Lorentzian polynomials. The class contains homogeneous stable
                                                   polynomials as well as volume polynomials of convex bodies and projective varieties. We prove
                                                   that the Hessian of a nonzero Lorentzian polynomial has exactly one positive eigenvalue at any
                                                   point on the positive orthant. This property can be seen as an analog of the Hodge–Riemann rela-
                                                   tions for Lorentzian polynomials.
                                                       Lorentzian polynomials are intimately connected to matroid theory and negative dependence
                                                   properties. We show that matroids, and more generally M-convex sets, are characterized by the
                                                   Lorentzian property, and develop a theory around Lorentzian polynomials. In particular, we pro-
                                                   vide a large class of linear operators that preserve the Lorentzian property and prove that Lorentzian
                                                   measures enjoy several negative dependence properties. We also prove that the class of tropicalized
                                                   Lorentzian polynomials coincides with the class of M-convex functions in the sense of discrete con-
                                                   vex analysis. The tropical connection is used to produce Lorentzian polynomials from M-convex
                                                   functions.
                                                      We give two applications of the general theory. First, we prove that the homogenized multi-
                                                   variate Tutte polynomial of a matroid is Lorentzian whenever the parameter q satisfies 0 ă q ď 1.
                                                   Consequences are proofs of the strongest Mason’s conjecture from 1972 and negative dependence
                                                   properties of the random cluster model in statistical physics. Second, we prove that the multivariate
                                                   characteristic polynomial of an M-matrix is Lorentzian. This refines a result of Holtz who proved
                                                   that the coefficients of the characteristic polynomial of an M-matrix form an ultra log-concave se-
                                                   quence.




                                                                                              C ONTENTS

                                           1.     Introduction                                                                                               2
                                           2.     Basic theory                                                                                               6
                                           2.1.    The space of Lorentzian polynomials                                                                       6
                                           2.2.    Hodge–Riemann relations for Lorentzian polynomials                                                       15
                                           2.3.    Independence and negative dependence                                                                     17
                                           2.4.    Characterizations of Lorentzian polynomials                                                              22
                                           3.     Advanced theory                                                                                           26
                                           3.1.    Linear operators preserving Lorentzian polynomials                                                       26
                                           3.2.    Matroids, M-convex sets, and Lorentzian polynomials                                                      31
                                           3.3.    Valuated matroids, M-convex functions, and Lorentzian polynomials                                        33
2                                      PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


    4.     Examples and applications                                                                        42
    4.1.    Convex bodies and Lorentzian polynomials                                                        42
    4.2.    Projective varieties and Lorentzian polynomials                                                 45
    4.3.    Potts model partition functions and Lorentzian polynomials                                      47
    4.4.    M-matrices and Lorentzian polynomials                                                           50
    4.5.    Lorentzian probability measures                                                                 55
    References                                                                                              57




                                            1. I NTRODUCTION

    Let Hdn be the space of degree d homogeneous polynomials in n variables with real coef-
ficients. Inspired by Hodge’s index theorem for projective varieties, we introduce a class of
polynomials with remarkable properties. Let L̊2n Ď H2n be the open subset of quadratic forms
with positive coefficients that have the Lorentzian signature p`, ´, . . . , ´q. For d larger than 2, we
define an open subset L̊dn Ď Hdn by setting
                                     !                                )
                               L̊dn “ f P Hdn | Bi f P L̊d´1
                                                         n   for all i ,

where Bi is the partial derivative with respect to the i-th variable. Thus f belongs to L̊dn if and
only if all polynomials of the form Bi1 Bi2 ¨ ¨ ¨ Bid´2 f belongs to L̊2n . The polynomials in L̊dn are
called strictly Lorentzian, and the limits of strictly Lorentzian polynomials are called Lorentzian.
We show that the class of Lorentzian polynomials contains the class of homogeneous stable
polynomials (Section 2.1) as well as volume polynomials of convex bodies and projective vari-
eties (Sections 4.1 and 4.2).
   Lorentzian polynomials link discrete and continuous notions of convexity. Let L2n Ď H2n be
the closed subset of quadratic forms with nonnegative coefficients that have at most one positive
eigenvalue, which is the closure of L̊2n in H2n . We write supppf q Ď Nn for the support of f P Hdn ,
the set of monomials appearing in f with nonzero coefficients. For d larger than 2, we define
Ldn Ď Hdn by setting
                                    !                                  )
                              Ldn “ f P Mdn | Bi f P Ld´1
                                                        n    for all i  ,
where Mdn Ď Hdn is the set of polynomials with nonnegative coefficients whose supports are M-
convex in the sense of discrete convex analysis [Mur03]: For any index i and any α, β P supppf q
whose i-th coordinates satisfy αi ą βi , there is an index j satisfying

                   αj ă βj and α ´ ei ` ej P supppf q and β ´ ej ` ei P supppf q,

where ei is the i-th standard unit vector in Nn . Since f P Mdn implies Bi f P Md´1           n , we have
                         !                                                                   )
                   Ldn “ f P Mdn | Bi1 Bi2 ¨ ¨ ¨ Bid´2 f P L2n for all i1 , i2 , . . . , id´2 .
                                          LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                                  3


   Our central result states that Ldn is the set of Lorentzian polynomials in Hdn (Theorem 2.25).
To show that Ldn is contained in the closure of L̊dn , we construct a Nuij-type homotopy for Ldn in
Section 2.1. The construction is used in Section 2.2 to prove that all polynomials in Ldn satisfy
a formal version of the Hodge–Riemann relations: The Hessian of any nonzero polynomial
in Ldn has exactly one positive eigenvalue at any point on the positive orthant. To show that
Ldn contains the closure of L̊dn , we develop the theory of c-Rayleigh polynomials in Section 2.3.
Since homogeneous stable polynomials are Lorentzian, the latter inclusion generalizes a result
of Choe et al. that the support of any homogenous multi-affine stable polynomial is the set of
bases of a matroid [COSW04]. In Section 2.4, we use the above results to show that the classes of
strongly log-concave [Gur09], completely log-concave [AOVI], and Lorentzian polynomials are
identical for homogeneous polynomials (Theorem 2.30). This enables us to affirmatively answer
two questions of Gurvits on strongly log-concave polynomials (Corollaries 2.31 and 2.32).
   Lorentzian polynomials are intimately connected to matroid theory and discrete convex anal-
ysis. We show that matroids, and more generally M-convex sets, are characterized by the
Lorentzian property. Let PHdn be the projectivization of the vector space Hdn , and let LJ be the set
of polynomials in Ldn with nonempty support J. We denote the images of Ldn , L̊dn , and LJ in PHdn
by PLdn , PL̊dn , and PLJ respectively, and write
                                                   ž
                                            PLdn “   PLJ ,
                                                         J

where the union is over all nonempty M-convex subsets of the d-th discrete simplex in Nn . The
space PLdn is homeomorphic to the intersection of Ldn with the unit sphere in Hdn for the Euclidean
norm on the coefficients. We prove that PLdn is a compact contractible set with contractible
interior PL̊dn (Theorem 2.28).1 In addition, we show that PLJ is nonempty and contractible for
every nonempty M-convex set J (Theorem 3.10 and Proposition 3.25). Similarly, writing Hdn
for the space of multi-affine degree d homogeneous polynomials in n variables and Ldn for the
corresponding set of multi-affine Lorentzian polynomials, we have
                                                 ž
                                          PLdn “   PLB ,
                                                         B

where the union is over all rank d matroids on the n-element set rns. The space PLdn is compact
and contractible, and PLB is nonempty and contractible for every matroid B (Remark 3.6). The
latter fact contrasts the case of stable polynomials. For example, there is no stable polynomial
whose support is the set of bases of the Fano plane [Brä07].
   In Section 3.1, we describe a large class of linear operators preserving the class of Lorentzian
polynomials, thus providing a toolbox for working with Lorentzian polynomials. We give a
Lorentzian analog of a theorem of Borcea and Brändén for stable polynomials [BB09], who char-
acterized linear operators preserving stable polynomials (Theorem 3.2). It follows from our re-
sult that any homogeneous linear operator that preserves stable polynomials and polynomials
with nonnegative coefficients also preserves Lorentzian polynomials (Theorem 3.4).
  1We conjecture that PLd is homeomorphic to the closed Euclidean ball of the same dimension (Conjecture 2.29).
                        n
4                                         PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


  In Section 3.3, we strengthen the connection between Lorentzian polynomials and discrete
convex analysis. For a function ν : Nn Ñ R Y t8u, we write dompνq Ď Nn for the effective
domain of ν, the subset of Nn where ν is finite. For a positive real parameter q, we consider the
generating function
                                   ÿ q νpαq
                        fqν pwq “               wα , w “ pw1 , . . . , wn q.
                                            α!
                                         αPdompνq

The main result here is Theorem 3.14, which states that fqν is a Lorentzian polynomial for all
0 ă q ď 1 if and only if the function ν is M-convex in the sense of discrete convex analysis
[Mur03]: For any index i and any α, β P dompνq whose i-th coordinates satisfy αi ą βi , there is
an index j satisfying

                      αj ă βj and νpαq ` νpβq ě νpα ´ ei ` ej q ` νpβ ´ ej ` ei q.
                                                                                           1 α
In particular, J Ď Nn is M-convex if and only if its exponential generating function αPJ α!
                                                                                    ř
                                                                                            w is
a Lorentzian polynomial (Theorem 3.10). Another special case of Theorem 3.14 is the statement
that a homogeneous polynomial with nonnegative coefficients is Lorentzian if the natural loga-
rithms of its normalized coefficients form an M-concave function (Corollary 3.16). Working over
the field of formal Puiseux series K, we show that the tropicalization of any Lorentzian polyno-
mial over K is an M-convex function, and that all M-convex functions are limits of tropicaliza-
tions of Lorentzian polynomials over K (Corollary 3.28). This generalizes a result of Brändén
[Brä10], who showed that the tropicalization of any homogeneous stable polynomial over K is
M-convex.2 In particular, for any matroid M with the set of bases B, the Dressian of all valuated
matroids on M can be identified with the tropicalization of the space of Lorentzian polynomials
over K with support B.
   In Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we show that the volume polynomials of convex bodies and projective
varieties are Lorentzian. It follows that, for any convex bodies K1 , . . . , Kn in Rd , the set of all
α P Nn satisfying the conditions

                       α1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` αn “ d and V pK1 , . . . , K1 , . . . , Kn , . .
                                                  looooomooooon                      .,K q ‰ 0
                                                                            looooomooooon
                                                             α1                  αn

is M-convex, where the symbol V stands for the mixed volume of convex bodies in Rd . Similarly,
for any d-dimensional projective variety Y and any nef divisors H1 , . . . , Hn on Y , the set of all
α P Nn satisfying the conditions

                      α1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` αn “ d and pH 1 ¨ . . . ¨ H1 ¨ . . . ¨ loooooomoooooon
                                               looooomooooon              Hn ¨ . . . ¨ Hn q ‰ 0
                                                           α1                   αn

is M-convex, where the symbol ¨ stands for the intersection product of Cartier divisors on Y .
The problem of finding a Lorentzian polynomial that is not a volume polynomial remains open.
For a precise formulation, see Question 4.9.

    2In [Brä10], the field of formal Puiseux series with real exponents was used. The tropicalization used in [Brä10]

differs from ours by a sign.
                                              LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                                     5


  In Section 4.3, we use the basic theory developed in Section 2 to show that the homogenized
multivariate Tutte polynomial of any matroid is Lorentzian. We use the Lorentzian property to
prove a conjecture of Mason from 1972 on the enumeration of independent sets [Mas72]: For
any matroid M on rns and any positive integer k,
                                           Ik pMq2  Ik`1 pMq Ik´1 pMq
                                            ` n˘ 2 ě ` n ˘    ` n ˘ ,
                                              k             k`1        k´1

where Ik pMq is the number of k-element independent sets of M. More generally, the Lorentzian
property reveals several inequalities satisfied by the coefficients of the classical Tutte polynomial
                                 ÿ
                     TM px, yq “      px ´ 1qrkM prnsq´rkM pAq py ´ 1q|A|´rkM pAq ,
                                         AĎrns
                       n
where rkM : t0, 1u Ñ N is the rank function of M. For example, if we write
                                                        n
                                     ´    q        ¯    ÿ
                        wrkM prnsq TM 1 ` , 1 ` w “        ckq pMqwk ,
                                          w            k“0

then the sequence ckq pMq is ultra log-concave for every 0 ď q ď 1.3
   In Section 4.4, we show that the multivariate characteristic polynomial of any M-matrix is
Lorentzian.4 This strengthens a theorem of Holtz [Hol05], who proved that the coefficients of
the characteristic polynomial of any M-matrix form an ultra log-concave sequence.
   In Section 4.5, we define a class of discrete probability measures, called Lorentzian measures,
properly containing the class of strongly Rayleigh measures studied in [BBL09]. We show that
Lorentzian measures enjoy several negative dependence properties and prove that the class of
Lorentzian measures is closed under the symmetric exclusion process. As an example, we show
that the uniform measure µM on t0, 1un concentrated on the independent sets of a matroid M
on rns is Lorentzian (Proposition 4.25). A conjecture of Kahn [Kah00] and Grimmett–Winkler
[GW04] states that, for any graphic matroid M and distinct elements i and j,
                       PrpF contains i and jq ď PrpF contains iq PrpF contains jq,
   3Nima Anari, Kuikui Liu, Shayan Oveis Gharan and Cynthia Vinzant have independently developed methods that

partially overlap with our work in a series of papers [AOVI, ALOVII, ALOVIII]. They study the class of completely
log-concave polynomials. For homogenous polynomials this class agrees with the class of Lorentzian polynomials, see
Theorem 2.30 in this paper. The main overlap is an independent proof of Mason’s conjecture in [ALOVIII]. The man-
uscript [BH], which is not intended for publication, contains a short self-contained proof of Mason’s conjecture which
was published on arXiv simultaneously as [ALOVIII]. In addition, the authors of [AOVI] prove that the basis generating
polynomial of any matroid is completely log-concave, using results of Adiprasito, Huh, and Katz [AHK18]. An equiva-
lent statement on the Hessian of the basis generating polynomial can be found in [HW17, Remark 15]. A self-contained
proof of the complete log-concavity of the basis generating polynomial, based on an implication similar to p3q ñ p1q of
Theorem 2.30 in this paper, appears in [ALOVII, Section 5.1]. The authors of [ALOVII] apply these results to design an
FPRAS to count the number of bases of any matroid given by an independent set oracle, and to prove the conjecture of
Mihail and Vazirani that the bases exchange graph of any matroid has expansion at least 1.
   4An nˆn matrix is an M-matrix if all the off-diagonal entries are nonpositive and all the principal minors are positive.

The class of M-matrices shares many properties of hermitian positive definite matrices and appears in mathematical
economics and computational biology [BP94].
6                                   PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


where F is an independent set of M chosen uniformly at random. The Lorentzian property of
the measure µM shows that, for any matroid M and distinct elements i and j,

                  PrpF contains i and jq ď 2PrpF contains iq PrpF contains jq,

where F is an independent set of M chosen uniformly at random.
Acknowledgments. Petter Brändén is a Wallenberg Academy Fellow supported by the Knut
and Alice Wallenberg Foundation and Vetenskapsrådet. June Huh was supported by NSF Grant
DMS-1638352 and the Ellentuck Fund. Special thanks go to anonymous referees, Claus Schei-
derer’s reading group, Jonathan Leake, and Yanxin Liu, whose valuable comments significantly
improved the quality of the paper.


                                          2. B ASIC THEORY

2.1. The space of Lorentzian polynomials. Let n and d be nonnegative integers, and set rns “
t1, . . . , nu. We write Hdn for the set of degree d homogeneous polynomials in Rrw1 , . . . , wn s.
We define a topology on Hdn using the Euclidean norm for the coefficients, and write Pdn Ď Hdn
for the open subset of polynomials all of whose coefficients are positive. The Hessian of f P
Rrw1 , . . . , wn s is the symmetric matrix
                                                 ´        ¯n
                                         Hf pwq “ Bi Bj f    ,
                                                            i,j“1

                                            B
where Bi stands for the partial derivative Bw i
                                                . For α P Nn , we write
                                        n
                                        ÿ                       n
                                                                ÿ
                                  α“         αi ei and |α|1 “         αi ,
                                       i“1                      i“1

where αi is a nonnegative integer and ei is the standard unit vector in Nn , and set

                             wα “ w1α1 ¨ ¨ ¨ wnαn and B α “ B1α1 ¨ ¨ ¨ Bnαn .

We define the d-th discrete simplex ∆dn Ď Nn by
                                          !                )
                                    ∆dn “ α P Nn | |α|1 “ d ,

and define the Boolean cube t0, 1un Ď Nn by
                                          #                    +
                                            ÿ
                                t0, 1un “     ei P Nn | S Ď rns .
                                               iPS

The intersection of the d-th discrete simplex and the Boolean cube will be denoted
                                        „ ȷ
                                         n
                                            “ t0, 1un X ∆dn .
                                         d
The cardinality of nd is the binomial coefficient nd . We often identify a subset S of rns with the
                  “ ‰                             ` ˘

zero-one vector iPS ei in Nn . For example, we write wS for the square-free monomial iPS wi .
                ř                                                                          ś
                                       LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                        7


Definition 2.1 (Lorentzian polynomials). We set L̊0n “ P0n , L̊1n “ P1n , and
                !                                                                  )
         L̊2n “ f P P2n | Hf is nonsingular and has exactly one positive eigenvalue .

For d larger than 2, we define L̊dn recursively by setting
                                   !                                     )
                            L̊dn “ f P Pdn | Bi f P L̊d´1
                                                      n   for all i P rns .

The polynomials in L̊dn are called strictly Lorentzian, and the limits of strictly Lorentzian polyno-
mials are called Lorentzian.

  Clearly, L̊dn is an open subset of Hdn , and the space L̊2n may be identified with the set of n ˆ n
symmetric matrices with positive entries that have the Lorentzian signature p`, ´, . . . , ´q. Un-
winding the recursive definition, we have
                                !                                          )
                          L̊dn “ f P Pdn | B α f P L̊2n for every α P ∆d´2
                                                                       n    .

Proposition 2.2 below on stable polynomials shows that L̊dn is nonempty for every n and d.
   An important subclass of Lorentzian polynomials is homogeneous stable polynomials, which
play a guiding role in many of our proofs. Recall that a polynomial f in Rrw1 , . . . , wn s is stable
if f is non-vanishing on Hn or identically zero, where H is the open upper half plane in C.
Let Sdn be the set of degree d homogeneous stable polynomials in n variables with nonnegative
coefficients. Hurwitz’s theorem shows that Sdn is a closed subset of Hdn [Wag11, Section 2]. When
f is homogeneous and has nonnegative coefficients, the stability of f is equivalent to any one of
the following statements on univariate polynomials in the variable x [BBL09, Theorem 4.5]:

– For any u P Rną0 , f pxu ´ vq has only real zeros for all v P Rn .
– For some u P Rną0 , f pxu ´ vq has only real zeros for all v P Rn .
– For any u P Rně0 with f puq ą 0, f pxu ´ vq has only real zeros for all v P Rn .
– For some u P Rně0 with f puq ą 0, f pxu ´ vq has only real zeros for all v P Rn .

We refer to [Wag11] and [Pem12] for background on the class of stable polynomials. We will use
the fact that any polynomial f P Sdn is the limit of polynomials in the interior of Sdn , that is, of
strictly stable polynomials [Nui68].

Proposition 2.2. Any polynomial in Sdn is Lorentzian.

Proof. We show that the interior of Sdn is a subset of L̊dn by induction on d. When d “ 2, the
statement follows from Lemma 2.5 below. The general case follows from the fact that Bi is an
open map sending Sdn to Sd´1
                         n   [Wag11, Lemma 2.4].                                            □

  All the nonzero coefficients of a homogeneous stable polynomial have the same sign [COSW04,
Theorem 6.1]. Thus, any homogeneous stable polynomial is a constant multiple of a Lorentzian
8                                    PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


polynomial. For example, determinantal polynomials of the form
                             f pw1 , . . . , wn q “ detpw1 A1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` wn An q,
where A1 , . . . , An are positive semidefinite matrices, are stable [BB08, Proposition 2.4], and
hence Lorentzian.

Example 2.3. Consider the homogeneous bivariate polynomial with positive coefficients
                                                d
                                                ÿ
                                          f“          ak w1k w2d´k .
                                                k“0

Computing the partial derivatives of f reveals that f is strictly Lorentzian if and only if
                                 a2k   ak´1 ak`1
                                `d˘2 ą ` d ˘ ` d ˘ for all 0 ă k ă d.
                                 k        k´1    k`1

On the other hand, f is stable if and only if the univariate polynomial f |w2 “1 has only real zeros.
Thus, a Lorentzian polynomial need not be stable. For example, consider the cubic form
                                f “ 2w13 ` 12w12 w2 ` 18w1 w22 ` θw23 ,
where θ is a real parameter. A straightforward computation shows that
         f is Lorentzian if and only if 0 ď θ ď 9, and f is stable if and only if 0 ď θ ď 8.

Example 2.4. Clearly, if f is in the closure of L̊dn in Hdn , then f has nonnegative coefficients and
                   B α f has at most one positive eigenvalue for every α P ∆d´2
                                                                            n .

The bivariate cubic f “ w13 ` w23 shows that the converse fails. In this case, B1 f and B2 f are
Lorentzian, but f is not Lorentzian.

  We give alternative characterizations of L̊2n . Similar arguments were given in [Gre81] and
[COSW04, Theorem 5.3].

Lemma 2.5. The following conditions are equivalent for any f P P2n .

(1) The Hessian of f has the Lorentzian signature p`, ´, . . . , ´q, that is, f P L̊2n .
(2) For any nonzero u P Rně0 , puT Hf vq2 ą puT Hf uqpv T Hf vq for any v P Rn not parallel to u.
(3) For some u P Rně0 , puT Hf vq2 ą puT Hf uqpv T Hf vq for any v P Rn not parallel to u.
(4) For any nonzero u P Rně0 , the univariate polynomial f pxu ´ vq in x has two distinct real
    zeros for any v P Rn not parallel to u.
(5) For some u P Rně0 , the univariate polynomial f pxu ´ vq in x has two distinct real zeros for
    any v P Rn not parallel to u.

    It follows that a quadratic form with nonnegative coefficients is strictly Lorentzian if and only
if it is strictly stable. Thus, a quadratic form with nonnegative coefficients is Lorentzian if and
only if it is stable.
                                             LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                                    9


Proof. We prove p1q ñ p2q. Since all the entries of Hf are positive, uT Hf u ą 0 for any nonzero
u P Rně0 . By Cauchy’s interlacing theorem, for any v P Rn not parallel to u, the restriction of Hf
to the plane spanned by u, v has signature p`, ´q. It follows that
                    ˜                    ¸
                       uT Hf u uT Hf v
                det                        “ puT Hf uqpv T Hf vq ´ puT Hf vq2 ă 0.
                       uT Hf v v T Hf v

  We prove p3q ñ p1q. Let u be the nonnegative vector in the statement p3q. Then Hf is negative
definite on the hyperplane tv P Rn | uT Hf v “ 0u. Since f P P2n , we have uT Hf u ą 0, and hence
Hf has the Lorentzian signature.
  The remaining implications follows from the fact that the univariate polynomial 21 f pxu ´ vq
has the discriminant puT Hf vq2 ´ puT Hf uqpv T Hf vq.                                       □

   Matroid theory captures various combinatorial notions of independence. A matroid M on rns
is a nonempty family of subsets B of rns, called the set of bases of M, that satisfies the exchange
property:

  For any B1 , B2 P B and i P B1 zB2 , there is j P B2 zB1 such that pB1 ziq Y j P B.

We refer to [Oxl11] for background on matroid theory. More generally, following [Mur03], we
define a subset J Ď Nn to be M-convex if it satisfies any one of the following equivalent condi-
tions5:

– For any α, β P J and any index i satisfying αi ą βi , there is an index j satisfying

                                          αj ă βj and α ´ ei ` ej P J.

– For any α, β P J and any index i satisfying αi ą βi , there is an index j satisfying

                             αj ă βj and α ´ ei ` ej P J and β ´ ej ` ei P J.

The first condition is called the exchange property for M-convex sets, and the second condition
is called the symmetric exchange property for M-convex sets. A proof of the equivalence can be
found in [Mur03, Chapter 4]. Note that any M-convex subset of Nn is necessarily contained
in the discrete simplex ∆dn for some d. We refer to [Mur03] for a comprehensive treatment of
M-convex sets.
   Let f be a polynomial in Rrw1 , . . . , wn s. We write f in the normalized form
                                            ÿ cα                          n
                                                                          ź
                                     f“                wα , where α! “          αi !.
                                           αPNn
                                                  α!                      i“1


   5The class of M-convex sets is essentially identical to the class of generalized polymatroids in the sense of [Fuj05].

Some other notions in the literature that are equivalent to M-convex sets are integral polymatroids [Wel76], discrete
polymatroids [HH03], and integral generalized permutohedras [Pos09]. We refer to [Mur03, Section 1.3] and [Mur03,
Section 4.7] for more details.
10                                      PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


The support of the polynomial f is the subset of Nn defined by
                                            !                )
                                 supppf q “ α P Nn | cα ‰ 0 .

We write Mdn for the set of all degree d homogeneous polynomials in Rě0 rw1 , . . . , wn s whose
supports are M-convex. Note that, in our convention, the empty subset of Nn is an M-convex
set. Thus, the zero polynomial belongs to Mdn , and f P Mdn implies Bi f P Md´1
                                                                            n . It follows from
                            d     d
[Brä07, Theorem 3.2] that Sn Ď Mn .

Definition 2.6. We set L0n “ S0n , L1n “ S1n , and L2n “ S2n . For d larger than 2, we define
          !                                       ) !                                          )
     Ldn “ f P Mdn | Bi f P Ld´1
                             n     for all i P rns “ f P Mdn | B α f P L2n for every α P ∆d´2n  .


  Clearly, Ldn contains L̊dn . In Theorem 2.25, we show that Ldn is the closure of L̊dn in Hdn . In other
words, Ldn is exactly the set of degree d Lorentzian polynomials in n variables. In this section,
we show that L̊dn is contractible and its closure contains Ldn . The following proposition plays a
central role in our analysis of Ldn . Analogous statements, in the context of hyperbolic polyno-
mials and stable polynomials, appear in [Nui68] and [LS81]. We fix a degree d homogeneous
polynomial f in n variables and indices i, j in rns.
                                  `          ˘
Proposition 2.7. If f P Ldn , then 1 ` θwi Bj f P Ldn for every nonnegative real number θ.

     We prepare the proof of Proposition 2.7 with two lemmas.
                            `          ˘
Lemma 2.8. If f P Mdn , then 1 ` θwi Bj f P Mdn for every nonnegative real number θ.

Proof. We may suppose θ “ 1 and j “ n. We use two combinatorial lemmas from [KMT07].
Introduce a new variable wn`1 , and set
                                                                        d
                                                                        ÿ   1 k
           gpw1 , . . . , wn , wn`1 q “ f pw1 , . . . , wn ` wn`1 q “          wn`1 Bnk f pw1 , . . . , wn q.
                                                                        k“0
                                                                            k!

By [KMT07, Lemma 6], the support of g is M-convex. In terms of [KMT07], the support of
g is obtained from the support of f by an elementary splitting, and the operation of splitting
preserves M-convexity. Therefore, g belongs to Mdn`1 . Since the intersection of an M-convex set
with a cartesian product of intervals is M-convex, it follows that
                                     `            ˘
                                       1 ` wn`1 Bn f P Mdn`1 .

By [KMT07, Lemma 9], the above displayed inclusion implies
                                     `          ˘
                                       1 ` wi Bn f P Mdn .
                                   `          ˘                                `           ˘
In terms of [KMT07], the support of 1 ` wi Bn f is obtained from the support of 1 ` wn`1 Bn f
by an elementary aggregation, and the operation of aggregation preserves M-convexity.       □
                                           LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                    11


   For stable polynomials f and g in Rrw1 , . . . , wn s, we define a relation f ă g by

                f ă g ðñ g ` wn`1 f is a stable polynomial in Rrw1 , . . . , wn , wn`1 s.

If f and g are univariate polynomials with leading coefficients of the same sign, then f ă g if
and only if the zeros of f interlace the zeros of g [BB10, Lemma 2.2]. In general, we have

                     f ă g ðñ f pxu ´ vq ă gpxu ´ vq for all u P Rną0 and v P Rn .

For later use, we record here basic properties of stable polynomials and the relation ă.

Lemma 2.9. Let f, g1 , g2 , h1 , h2 be stable polynomials satisfying h1 ă f ă g1 and h2 ă f ă g2 .

(1) The derivative B1 f is stable and B1 f ă f .
(2) The diagonalization f pw1 , w1 , w3 , . . . , wn q is stable.
(3) The dilation f pa1 w1 , . . . , an wn q is stable for any a P Rně0 .
(4) If f is not identically zero, then f ă θ1 g1 ` θ2 g2 for any θ1 , θ2 ě 0.
(5) If f is not identically zero, then θ1 h1 ` θ2 h2 ă f for any θ1 , θ2 ě 0.

   The statement B1 f ă f appears, for example, in [BBL09, Section 4]. It follows that, if f is
stable, then p1 ` θwi Bj qf is stable for every nonnegative real number θ. The remaining proof of
Lemma 2.9 can be found in [Wag11, Section 2] and [BB10, Section 2].

Proof of Proposition 2.7. When d “ 2, Lemma 2.9 implies Proposition 2.7. Suppose d ě 3, and set
                                           `          ˘
                                        g “ 1 ` θwi Bj f.

By Lemma 2.8, the support of g is M-convex. Therefore, it is enough to prove that B α g is stable
for all α P ∆d´2
             n . We give separate arguments when αi “ 0 and αi ą 0. If αi “ 0, then

                                          B α g “ B α f ` θwi B α`ej f.

In this case, (1), (2), and (3) of Lemma 2.9 for B α f show that B α g is stable. If αi ą 0, then

                       B α g “ B α f ` θαi B α´ei `ej f ` θwi B α`ej f
                                  ´        ¯           ´        ¯       ´        ¯
                             “ Bi B α´ei f ` θαi Bj B α´ei f ` θwi Bi Bj B α´ei f .

In this case, (1) of Lemma 2.9 applies to the stable polynomials B α f and B α´ei `ej f :
                        ´        ¯    ´        ¯         ´        ¯     ´        ¯
                   Bi Bj B α´ei f ă Bi B α´ei f and Bi Bj B α´ei f ă Bj B α´ei f .

Therefore, unless B α`ej f is identically zero, B α g is stable by (2) and (4) of Lemma 2.9.
   It remains to prove that, whenever αi is positive and B α`ej f is identically zero,
             ´        ¯       ´       ¯
           Bi B α´ei f ` ϕ Bj B α´ei f is stable for every nonnegative real number ϕ.

Since the cubic form B α´ei f is in L3n , it is enough to prove the statement when d “ 3 and α “ ei .
12                                           PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


     We show that, if f is in L3n and Bi Bj f is identically zero, then
                         Bi f ` ϕ Bj f is stable for every nonnegative real number ϕ.
The statement is clear when pBi f qpBj f q is identically zero. If otherwise, there are monomials
of the form wi wi1 wi2 and wj wj 1 wj 2 in the support of f . We apply the symmetric exchange
property to the support of f , the monomials wi wi1 wi2 , wj wj 1 wj 2 , and the variable wi : We see
that the monomial wj wi1 wi2 must be in the support of f , since no monomial in the support of f
is divisible by wi wj . For a positive real parameter s, set
                                                `          ˘
                                          hs “ 1 ` swi Bi1 f.
Since Bi Bi1 f is not identically zero, the argument in the first paragraph shows that hs is in L3n .
Similarly, since Bi Bj hs is not identically zero, we have
                      `           ˘
                        1 ` ϕwi Bj hs P L3n for every nonnegative real number ϕ.
Since stability is a closed condition, it follows that
             ´               ¯
       lim Bi hs ` ϕwi Bj hs “ Bi f ` ϕ Bj f is stable for every nonnegative real number ϕ.                          □
         sÑ0

     We use Proposition 2.7 to show that any nonnegative linear change of variables preserves Ldn .

Theorem 2.10. If f pwq P Ldn , then f pAvq P Ldm for any n ˆ m matrix A with nonnegative entries.

Proof. Fix f “ f pw1 , . . . , wn q in Ldn . Note that Theorem 2.10 follows from its three special cases:

      (I) the elementary splitting f pw1 , . . . , wn´1 , wn ` wn`1 q is in Ldn`1 ,
     (II) the dilation f pw1 , . . . , wn´1 , θwn q is in Ldn for any θ ě 0,
     (III) the diagonalization f pw1 , . . . , wn´2 , wn´1 , wn´1 q is in Ldn´1 ,

As observed in the proof of Lemma 2.8, an elementary splitting preserves M-convexity:
                                       f pw1 , . . . , wn´1 , wn ` wn`1 q P Mdn`1 .
Therefore,6 the first statement follows from Proposition 2.7:
                         ˆ            ˙k
                             wn`1 Bn
                    lim 1 `            f “ f pw1 , . . . , wn´1 , wn ` wn`1 q P Ldn`1 .
                   kÑ8           k

     For the second statement, note from the definition of M-convexity that
                                              f pw1 , . . . , wn´1 , 0q P Mdn .
Thus the second statement for θ “ 0 follows from the case θ ą 0, which is trivial to verify.
  The proof of the third statement is similar to that of the first statement. As observed in the
proof of Lemma 2.8, an elementary aggregation preserves M-convexity, and hence
                                        f pw1 , . . . , wn´1 , wn´1 ` wn q P Mdn .
     6It is necessary to check the inclusion in Md                                                  d
                                                n`1 in advance because we have not yet proved that Ln`1 is closed.
                                        LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                           13


Therefore, Proposition 2.7 implies that
                       ˆ             ˙k
                             wn´1 Bn
                   lim 1 `              f “ f pw1 , . . . , wn´1 , wn´1 ` wn q P Ldn .
                  kÑ8           k
By the second statement, we may substitute wn in the displayed equation by zero.                         □

   Theorem 2.10 can be used to show that taking directional derivatives in nonnegative direc-
tions takes polynomials in Ldn to polynomials in Ld´1 n .

                                   n
Corollary 2.11. If f P Ldn , then i“1 ai Bi f P Ld´1
                                 ř
                                                 n   for any a1 , . . . , an ě 0.
                                                                                                řn
Proof. We apply Theorem 2.10 to f and the matrix with column vectors e1 , . . . , en and         i“1 ai ei :

            g :“ f pw1 ` a1 wn`1 , . . . , wn ` an wn`1 q P Ldn`1 , and hence Bn`1 g P Ld´1
                                                                                        n`1 .

Applying Theorem 2.10 to Bn`1 g and the matrix with column vectors e1 , . . . , en and 0, we get
                                                        n
                                                        ÿ
                                   Bn`1 g|wn`1 “0 “           ai Bi f P Ld´1
                                                                         n .                             □
                                                        i“1

   Let θ be a nonnegative real parameter. We define a linear operator Tn pθ, ´q by
                                             ˜                   ¸
                                               n´1
                                               ź`             ˘d
                                Tn pθ, f q “       1 ` θwi Bn     f.
                                                  i“1

By Proposition 2.7, if f   P Ldn , then Tn pθ, f q P Ldn .
                                                    In addition, if f P Pdn , then Tn pθ, f q P Pdn .
Most importantly, the operator Tn satisfies the following Nuij-type homotopy lemma. For a
similar argument in the context of hyperbolic polynomials, see the proof of the main theorem in
[Nui68].

Lemma 2.12. If f P Ldn X Pdn , then Tn pθ, f q P L̊dn for every positive real number θ.

Proof. Let ei be the i-th standard unit vector in Rn , and let v be any vector in Rn not parallel to
en . From here on, in this proof, all polynomials are restricted to the line xen ´ v and considered
as univariate polynomials in x.
  Let α be an arbitrary element of ∆d´2  n . By Lemma 2.5, it is enough to show that the quadratic
                α
polynomial B Tn pθ, f q has two distinct real zeros. Using Proposition 2.7, we can deduce the
preceding statement from the following claims:
                                                      `          ˘
    (I) If B α f has two distinct real zeros, then B α 1 ` θwi Bn f has two distinct zeros.
                                   `           ˘d
   (II) If vi is nonzero, then B α 1 ` θwi Bn f has two distinct real zeros.
                                                                            `          ˘
We first prove (I). Suppose B α f has two distinct real zeros, and set g “ 1 ` θwi Bn f . Note that
                              B α g “ B α f ` θαi B α´ei `en f ` θwi B α`en f.
Let c be the unique zero of B α`en f . Since c strictly interlaces two distinct zeros of B α f , we have
                                              B α f |x“c ă 0.
14                                     PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


Similarly, since B α´ei `en f has only real zeros and B α`en f ă B α´ei `en f , we have

                                            B α´ei `en f |x“c ď 0.

Thus B α g|x“c ă 0, and hence B α g has two distinct real zeros. This completes the proof of (I).
     Before proving (II), we strengthen (I) as follows:

     (III) A multiple zero of B α g is necessarily a multiple zero of B α f .

Suppose B α g has a multiple zero. Using (I), we know that B α f has a multiple zero, say c. Clearly,
c must be also a zero of B α`en f . Since c interlaces the two (not necessarily distinct) zeros of
B α´ei `en f , we have
                                    B α g|x“c “ θαi B α´ei `en f |x“c ď 0.

Therefore, if c is not a zero of B α g, then B α g has two distinct zeros, contradicting the hypothesis
that B α g has a multiple zero. This completes the proof of (III).
                               `             ˘d
   We prove (II). Suppose B α 1 ` θwi Bn f has a multiple zero, say c. Using (III), we know that
                                                      `          ˘k
                the number c is a multiple zero of B α 1 ` θwi Bn f for all 0 ď k ď d.

Expanding the k-th power and using the linearity of B α , we deduce that

                          the number c is a zero of B α wik Bnk f for all 0 ď k ď d.

However, since f has positive coefficients, the value of B α wiαi `2 Bnαi `2 f at c is a positive multiple
of vi2 , and hence vi must be zero. This completes the proof of (II).                                   □

     We use Lemma 2.12 to prove the main result of this subsection.

Theorem 2.13. The closure of L̊dn in Hdn contains Ldn .

Proof. Let f be a polynomial in Ldn that is not identically zero, and let θ be a real parameter
satisfying 0 ď θ ď 1. By Theorem 2.10, we have
                   1 ´                                                                           ¯
     Spθ, f q :“       f p1 ´ θqw1 ` θpw1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` wn q, . . . , p1 ´ θqwn ` θpw1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` wn q P Ldn ,
                 |f |1

where |f |1 is the sum of all coefficients of f . Since Spθ, f q belongs to Pdn when 0 ă θ ď 1, Lemma
2.12 shows that we have a homotopy
                                      ´           ¯
                                  Tn θ, Spθ, f q P L̊dn , 0 ă θ ď 1,
                                   `                      ˘
that deforms f to the polynomial Tn 1, pw1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` wn qd . It follows that the closure of L̊dn in Hdn
contains Ldn .                                                                                       □

     We show in Theorem 2.25 that the closure of L̊dn in Hdn is, in fact, equal to Ldn .
                                           LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                          15


2.2. Hodge–Riemann relations for Lorentzian polynomials. Let f be a nonzero degree d ě 2
homogeneous polynomial with nonnegative coefficients in variables w1 , . . . , wn . The following
proposition may be seen as an analog of the Hodge–Riemann relations for homogeneous stable
polynomials.7

Proposition 2.14. If f is in Sdn z0, then Hf pwq has exactly one positive eigenvalue for all w P Rną0 .
Moreover, if f is in the interior of Sdn , then Hf pwq is nonsingular for all w P Rną0 .

Proof. Fix a vector w P Rną0 . By Lemma 2.5, the Hessian of f has exactly one positive eigenvalue
at w if and only if the following quadratic polynomial in z is stable:
                                                ÿ
                                 z T Hf pwqz “      zi zj Bi Bj f pwq.
                                                      1ďi,jďn

The above is the quadratic part of the stable polynomial with nonnegative coefficients f pz ` wq,
and hence is stable by [BBL09, Lemma 4.16].
  Moreover, if f is strictly stable, then fϵ “ f ˘ ϵpw1d ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` wnd q is stable for all sufficiently small
positive ϵ. Therefore, by the result obtained in the previous paragraph, the matrix

                           Hfϵ pwq “ Hf pwq ˘ dpd ´ 1qϵ diagpw1d´2 , . . . , wnd´2 q

has exactly one positive eigenvalue for all sufficiently small positive ϵ, and hence Hf pwq is
nonsingular.                                                                                □

   In Theorem 2.16, we extend the above result to Lorentzian polynomials.

Lemma 2.15. If HBi f pwq has exactly one positive eigenvalue for every i P rns and w P Rną0 , then
                                            n
                                            č
                            ker Hf pwq “          ker HBi f pwq for every w P Rną0 .
                                            i“1


Proof. We may suppose d ě 3. Fix w P Rną0 , and write Hf for Hf pwq. We will use Euler’s
formula for homogeneous functions:
                                                         n
                                                         ÿ
                                                  df “         wi Bi f.
                                                         i“1

It follows that the Hessians of f and Bi f satisfy the relation
                                                               n
                                                               ÿ
                                          pd ´ 2q Hf “               wi HBi f ,
                                                               i“1

and hence the kernel of Hf contains the intersection of the kernels of HBi f .
   For the other inclusion, let z be a vector in the kernel of Hf . By Euler’s formula again,

                                pd ´ 2q eTi Hf “ wT HBi f for every i P rns,

   7We refer to [Huh18] for a survey of the Hodge–Riemann relations in combinatorial contexts.
16                                    PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


and hence wT HBi f z “ 0 for every i P rns. We have wT HBi f w ą 0 because Bi f is nonzero and
has nonnegative coefficients. Since HBi f pwq has exactly one positive eigenvalue, it follows that
HBi f is negative semidefinite on the kernel of wT HBi f . In particular,

                        z T HBi f z ď 0, with equality if and only if HBi f z “ 0.

To conclude, we write zero as the positive linear combination
                                         ´        ¯ ÿn    ´            ¯
                              0 “ pd ´ 2q z T Hf z “   w i z T HB i f z .
                                                         i“1

Since every summand in the right-hand side is non-positive by the previous analysis, we must
have z T HBi f z “ 0 for every i P rns, and hence HBi f z “ 0 for every i P .rns.         □

   We now prove an analog of the Hodge–Riemann relation for Lorentzian polynomials. When
f is the volume polynomial of a projective variety as defined in Section 4.2, then the one posi-
tive eigenvalue condition for the Hessian of f at w is equivalent to the validity of the Hodge–
Riemann relations on the space of divisor classes of the projective variety with respect to the
polarization corresponding to w.

Theorem 2.16. Let f be a nonzero homogeneous polynomial in Rrw1 , . . . , wn s of degree d ě 2.

(1) If f is in L̊dn , then Hf pwq is nonsingular for all w P Rną0 .
(2) If f is in Ldn , then Hf pwq has exactly one positive eigenvalue for all w P Rną0 .

Proof. By Theorem 2.13, Ldn is in the closure of L̊dn . Note that, for any nonzero polynomial f of
degree d ě 2 with nonnegative coefficients, Hf pwq has at least one positive eigenvalue for any
w P Rną0 . Therefore, we may suppose f P L̊dn in (2). We prove (1) and (2) simultaneously by
induction on d under this assumption. The base case d “ 2 is trivial. We suppose that d ě 3 and
that the theorem holds for L̊d´1
                             n .

   That (1) holds for L̊dn follows from induction and Lemma 2.15. Using Proposition 2.14, we
see that (2) holds for stable polynomials in L̊dn . Since L̊dn is connected by Theorem 2.13, the
continuity of eigenvalues and the validity of (1) together implies (2).                       □

   Theorem 2.16, when combined with the following proposition, shows that all polynomials in
Ldn share a negative dependence property. The negative dependence property will be systemat-
ically studied in the following section.

Proposition 2.17. If Hf pwq has exactly one positive eigenvalue for all w P Rną0 , then
                                 ´    1¯
            f pwq Bi Bj f pwq ď 2 1 ´   Bi f pwq Bj f pwq for all w P Rně0 and i, j P rns.
                                      d

Proof. Fix w P Rną0 , and write H for Hf pwq. By Euler’s formula for homogeneous functions,

                        wT Hw “ dpd ´ 1qf pwq and wT Hei “ pd ´ 1qBi f pwq.
                                          LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                           17


Let t be a real parameter, and consider the restriction of H to the plane spanned by w and
vt “ ei ` tej . By Theorem 2.16, H has exactly one positive eigenvalue. Therefore, by Cauchy’s
interlacing theorem, the restriction of H also has exactly one positive eigenvalue. In particular,
the determinant of the restriction must be nonpositive:
                                ˘2 `
                         w Hvt ´ wT Hw ¨ vtT Hvt ě 0 for all t P R.
                        ` T                  ˘ `       ˘

In other words, for all t P R, we have

                   pd ´ 1q2 pBi f ` tBj f q2 ´ dpd ´ 1qf pBi2 f ` 2tBi Bj f ` t2 Bj2 f q ě 0.

It follows that, for all t P R, we have

                            pd ´ 1q2 pBi f ` tBj f q2 ´ 2tdpd ´ 1qf Bi Bj f ě 0.

Thus, the discriminant of the above quadratic polynomial in t should be nonpositive:
                                             ´    1¯
                                f Bi Bj f ´ 2 1 ´    Bi f Bj f ď 0.
                                                  d
This completes the proof of Proposition 2.17.                                                              □

2.3. Independence and negative dependence. Let c be a fixed positive real number, and let f be
a polynomial in Rrw1 , . . . , wn s. In this section, the polynomial f is not necessarily homogeneous.
As before, we write ei for the i-th standard unit vector in Rn .

Definition 2.18. We say that f is c-Rayleigh if f has nonnegative coefficients and

        B α f pwq B α`ei `ej f pwq ď c B α`ei f pwq B α`ej f pwq for all i, j P rns, α P Nn , w P Rně0 .

  When f is the partition function of a discrete probability measure µ, the c-Rayleigh condition
captures a negative dependence property of µ. More precisely, when f is multi-affine, that is,
when f has degree at most one in each variable, the c-Rayleigh condition for f is equivalent to

             f pwq Bi Bj f pwq ď cBi f pwq Bj f pwq for all distinct i, j P rns, and w P Rně0 .

Thus the 1-Rayleigh property of multi-affine polynomials is equivalent to the Rayleigh property
for discrete probability measures studied in [Wag08] and [BBL09].
                                             ´     ¯
Proposition 2.19. Any polynomial in Ldn is 2 1 ´ d1 -Rayleigh.
                                                                             `      ˘
Proof. The statement follows from Theorem 2.16 and Proposition 2.17 because 2 1 ´ d1 is an
increasing function of d.                                                                □

  The goal of this section is to show that the support of any homogeneous c-Rayleigh polyno-
mial is M-convex (Theorem 2.23). The notion of M6 -convexity will be useful for the proof: A
subset J6 Ď Nn is said to be M6 -convex if there is an M-convex set J in Nn`1 such that
                                !                                                 )
                           J6 “ pα1 , . . . , αn q | pα1 , . . . , αn , αn`1 q P J .
18                                           PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


The projection from J to J6 should be bijective for any such J, as the M-convexity of J implies
that J is in ∆dn for some d. We refer to [Mur03, Section 4.7] for more on M6 -convex sets.
  We prepare the proof of Theorem 2.23 with three lemmas. Verification of the first lemma is
routine and will be omitted.

Lemma 2.20. The following polynomials are c-Rayleigh whenever f is c-Rayleigh:

(1) The contraction Bi f of f .
(2) The deletion f zi of f , the polynomial obtained from f by evaluating wi “ 0.
(4) The dilation f pa1 w1 , . . . , an wn q, for pa1 , . . . , an q P Rně0 .
(5) The translation f pa1 ` w1 , . . . , an ` wn q, for pa1 , . . . , an q P Rně0 .

Remark. Lemma 2.20 in the previous version of this manuscript contained the following incor-
rect statement:

(3) If f pw1 , w2 , w3 , . . . , wn q is c-Rayleigh, then so is the diagonalization f pw1 , w1 , w3 , . . . , wn q.

This implies that the rank sequence of any Rayleigh measure is strongly log-concave, which
is known to be not true [BBL09, Section 7, Counterexample 1]. In fact, the rank sequence of a
Rayleigh measure need not even be unimodal [KN10, Theorem 6]. Proof of Lemma 2.22 below
is revised accordingly.

     We introduce a partial order ď on Nn by setting

                                         α ď β ðñ αi ď βi for all i P rns.

We say that a subset J6 of Nn is interval convex if the following implication holds:
                             ´                            ¯
                               α P J6 , β P J6 , α ď γ ď β ùñ γ P J6 .

The augmentation property for J6 Ď Nn is the implication
         ´                             ¯   ´                                       ¯
          α P J6 , β P J6 , |α|1 ă |β|1 ùñ αj ă βj and α ` ej P J6 for some j P rns .

Lemma 2.21. Let J6 be an interval convex subset of Nn containing 0. Then J6 is M6 -convex if
and only if J6 satisfies the augmentation property.

    Therefore, a nonempty interval convex subset of t0, 1un containing 0 is M6 -convex if and only
if it is the collection of independent sets of a matroid on rns.

Proof. Let d be any sufficiently large positive integer, and set
                     !                                                                        )
                 J “ pα1 , . . . , αn , d ´ α1 ´ ¨ ¨ ¨ ´ αn q P Nn`1 | pα1 , . . . , αn q P J6 .

The “only if” direction is straightforward: If J6 is M6 -convex, then J is M-convex, and the aug-
mentation property for J6 is a special case of the exchange property for J.
                                       LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                      19


   We prove the “if” direction by checking the exchange property for J. Let α and β be elements
of J, and let i be an index satisfying αi ą βi . We claim that there is an index j satisfying

                                   αj ă βj and α ´ ei ` ej P J.

By the augmentation property for J6 , it is enough to justify the claim when i ‰ n ` 1. When
αn`1 ă βn`1 , then we may take j “ n ` 1, again by the augmentation property for M6 .
   Suppose αn`1 ě βn`1 . In this case, we consider the element γ “ α ´ ei ` en`1 . The element γ
belongs to J, because J6 is an interval convex set containing 0. We have γn`1 ą βn`1 , and hence
the augmentation property for J6 gives an index j satisfying

                          γj ă βj and α ´ ei ` ej “ γ ´ en`1 ` ej P J.

This index j is necessarily different from i because αi ą βi . It follows that αj “ γj ă βj , and the
M-convexity of J is proved.                                                                        □

Lemma 2.22. Let f be a c-Rayleigh polynomial in Rrw1 , . . . , wn s.

(1) The support of f is interval convex.
(2) If f p0q is nonzero, then supppf q is M6 -convex.

Proof. Suppose that the polynomial f and the vectors α ď γ ď β constitute a minimal coun-
terexample to (1) with respect to the degree and the number of variables of f . We may and will
suppose that |β|1 is minimal among all such α ď γ ď β for the polynomial f . We have

                                           αj “ 0 for all j,

since otherwise some contraction Bj f is a smaller counterexample to (1). Similarly, we have

                                           βj ą 0 for all j,

since otherwise some deletion f zj is a smaller counterexample to (1). In addition, we may
assume that γ is a unit vector, say
                                                γ “ ei ,
since otherwise the contraction Bj f for any j satisfying γj ą 0 is a smaller counterexample to
(1). Suppose ej is in the support of f for some j. In this case, we should have

                                          ei ` ej P supppf q,

since otherwise Bj f is a smaller counterexample to (1). However, the above implies

                                 Bi f p0q “ 0 and f p0qBi Bj f p0q ą 0,

contradicting the c-Rayleigh property of f . Therefore, no ej is in the support of f , and hence

                                   |δ|1 ě |β|1 for all δ P supppf q,
20                                   PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


by the minimality of |β|1 . Thus, for any indices k and l satisfying β ě ek ` el , we have

                              f pϵ, . . . , ϵq “ a1 ` higher order terms,
                           Bk f pϵ, . . . , ϵq “ a2 ϵ|β|1 ´1 ` higher order terms,
                            Bl f pϵ, . . . , ϵq “ a3 ϵ|β|1 ´1 ` higher order terms,
                         Bk Bl f pϵ, . . . , ϵq “ a4 ϵ|β|1 ´2 ` higher order terms,

for some positive constants a1 , a2 , a3 , a4 . This contradicts the c-Rayleigh property of f for suffi-
ciently small positive ϵ, proving (1).
  Suppose f is a counterexample to (2) that is minimal with respect to the degree and the
number of variables of f . By Lemma 2.21 and (1) of the current lemma, we know that the
support of f fails to have the augmentation property. In other words, there are α and β in the
support of f such that |α|1 ă |β|1 and, for all i,

                                    αi ă βi ùñ α ` ei R supppf q.

We may and will suppose that |α|1 is minimal among all such α and β for the polynomial f . For
any γ, write Spγq for the set of indices i such that γi ą 0. If i is in the intersection of Spαq and
Spβq, then Bi f is a counterexample to (2) that has degree less than that of f , and hence

                                           Spαq X Spβq “ ∅.

Similarly, if i is not in the union of Spαq and Spβq, then f zi is a counterexample to (2) that
involves less than n variables, and hence

                                          Spαq Y Spβq “ rns.

Since supppf q is interval convex by (1), there is an index i in Spαq. In addition, since f p0q is
nonzero, we have
                                           α ´ ei P supppf q.
The vectors α ´ ei and β satisfy the augmentation property for supppf q, by the minimality of
|α|1 . Therefore, there is an index j such that

                             pα ´ ei qj ă βj and α ´ ei ` ej P supppf q.

The first condition shows that the index j cannot be in Spαq, so it must be in Spβq. The vectors
α ´ ei ` ej and β satisfy the augmentation property for supppf q, since otherwise Bj f is a smaller
counterexample to (2). Therefore, there is an index k such that

                       pα ´ ei ` ej qk ă βk and α ´ ei ` ej ` ek P supppf q.

The first condition shows that the index k cannot be in Spαq, so it must be in Spβq. On the other
hand, since j and k are in Spβq and not in Spαq, the failure of the augmentation property for α
and β implies
                              α ` ej R supppf q and α ` ek R supppf q.
                                          LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                 21


Note that the c-Rayleigh polynomial g – B α´ei f satisfies

                          ei , ej ` ek P supppgq and ei ` ej , ei ` ek R supppgq.

The first pair of conditions shows that gpwqBj Bk gpwq is a strictly increasing function of wi if
we set all the variables other than wi equal to 1. On the other hand, the second pair of condi-
tions shows that Bj gpwqBk gpwq is independent of wi , by the interval convexity of supppgq. This
contradicts the c-Rayleigh property of g, proving (2).                                         □

Theorem 2.23. If f is homogeneous and c-Rayleigh, then the support of f is M-convex.


Proof. By (5) of Lemma 2.20 and (2) of Lemma 2.22, the support of the translation

                                 gpw1 , . . . , wn q “ f pw1 ` 1, . . . , wn ` 1q

is M6 -convex. In other words, the support J of the homogenization of g is M-convex. Since
the intersection of an M-convex set with a coordinate hyperplane is M-convex, this implies the
M-convexity of the support of f .                                                           □


  A multi-affine polynomial f is said to be strongly Rayleigh if

              f pwq Bi Bj f pwq ď Bi f pwq Bj f pwq for all distinct i, j P rns, and w P Rn .

Clearly, any strongly Rayleigh multi-affine polynomial is 1-Rayleigh. Since a multi-affine poly-
nomial is stable if and only if it is strongly Rayleigh [Brä07, Theorem 5.6], Theorem 2.23 extends
the following theorem of Choe et al. [COSW04, Theorem 7.1]: If f is a nonzero homogeneous
stable multi-affine polynomial, then the support of f is the set of bases of a matroid.
  Lastly, we show that the bound in Proposition 2.19 is optimal.

Proposition 2.24. When n ď 2, all polynomials in Ldn are 1-Rayleigh. When n ě 3, we have
                   ´                                     ¯            ´     1¯
                    all polynomials in Ldn are c-Rayleigh ùñ c ě 2 1 ´         .
                                                                            d
                                             ´     ¯
In other words, for any n ě 3 and any c ă 2 1 ´ d1 , there is f P Ldn that is not c-Rayleigh.


Proof. We first show by induction that, for any homogeneous bivariate polynomial f “ f pw1 , w2 q
with nonnegative coefficients, we have
                         ´           ¯ ´         ¯´      ¯
                    f pwq B1 B2 f pwq ď B1 f pwq B2 f pwq for any w P R2ě0 .

We use the obvious fact that, for any homogeneous polynomial with nonnegative coefficients h,
                    `             ˘   `         ˘
                        degphq ` 1 h ě 1 ` wi Bi h for any i P rns and w P Rně0 .
22                                       PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


Since f is bivariate, we may write f “ c1 w1d ` c2 w2d ` w1 w2 g. We have

        B1 f B2 f ´ f B1 B2 f “ d2 c1 c2 w1d´1 w2d´1
                               ` dc1 w1d p1 ` w2 B2 qg ´ c1 w1d p1 ` w1 B1 qp1 ` w2 B2 qg
                               ` dc2 w2d p1 ` w1 B1 qg ´ c2 w2d p1 ` w1 B1 qp1 ` w2 B2 qg
                               ` w1 w2 pg ` w1 B1 gqpg ` w2 B2 gq ´ w1 w2 gp1 ` w1 B1 qp1 ` w2 B2 qg.

The summand in the second line is nonnegative on R2ě0 by the mentioned fact for p1 ` w2 B2 qg.
The summand in the third line is nonnegative on R2ě0 by the mentioned fact for p1 ` w1 B1 qg. The
summand in the fourth line is nonnegative on R2ě0 by the induction hypothesis applied to g.
     We next show that, for any bivariate Lorentzian polynomial f “ f pw1 , w2 q, we have
                          ´          ¯ ´         ¯´       ¯
                    f pwq B1 B1 f pwq ď B1 f pwq B1 f pwq for any w P R2ě0 .

Since f is homogeneous, it is enough to prove the inequality when w2 “ 1. In this case, the
inequality follows from the concavity of the function log f restricted to the line w2 “ 1. This
completes the proof that any bivariate Lorentzian polynomial is 1-Rayleigh.
     To see the second statement, consider the polynomial
                             ´     1¯ d
                        f “2 1´       w ` w1d´1 w2 ` w1d´1 w3 ` w1d´2 w2 w3 .
                                   d 1
It is straightforward to check that f is in Ldn . If f is c-Rayleigh, then, for any w P Rně0 ,
                 ´ ´     1¯ 2                               ¯          ´         ¯´          ¯
           w12d´4 2 1 ´    w1 ` w1 w2 ` w1 w3 ` w2 w3 ď cw12d´4 w1 ` w2 w1 ` w3 .
                        d
The desired lower bound for c is obtained by setting w1 “ 1, w2 “ 0, w3 “ 0.                            □

2.4. Characterizations of Lorentzian polynomials. We may now give a complete and useful
description of the space of Lorentzian polynomials. As before, we write Hdn for the space of
degree d homogeneous polynomials in n variables.

Theorem 2.25. The closure of L̊dn in Hdn is Ldn . In particular, Ldn is a closed subset of Hdn .

Proof. By Theorem 2.13, the closure of L̊dn contains Ldn . Since any limit of c-Rayleigh polynomials
must be c-Rayleigh, the other inclusion follows from Theorem 2.23 and Proposition 2.19.           □

    Therefore, a degree d homogeneous polynomial f with nonnegative coefficients is Lorentzian
if and only if the support of f is M-convex and B α f has at most one positive eigenvalue for every
α P ∆d´2
      n . In other words, Definitions 2.1 and 2.6 define the same class of polynomials.

Example 2.26. A sequence of nonnegative numbers a0 , a1 , . . . , ad is said to be ultra log-concave if
                                    a2k     ak´1 ak`1
                                   ` d ˘2 ě ` d ˘ ` d ˘      for all 0 ă k ă d.
                                    k        k´1       k`1
                                          LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                  23


The sequence is said to have no internal zeros if
                        ak1 ak3 ą 0 ùñ ak2 ą 0  for all 0 ď k1 ă k2 ă k3 ď d.
                                                                          řd
Recall from Example 2.3 that a bivariate homogeneous polynomial k“0 ak w1k w2d´k is strictly
Lorentzian if and only if the sequence ak is positive and strictly ultra log-concave. Theorem 2.25
                                       řd
says that, in this case, the polynomial k“0 ak w1k w2d´k is Lorentzian if and only if the sequence
ak is nonnegative, ultra log-concave, and has no internal zeros.

Example 2.27. Using Theorem 2.25, it is straightforward to check that elementary symmetric
polynomials are Lorentzian. In fact, one can show more generally that all normalized Schur
polynomials are Lorentzian [HMMS, Theorem 3]. Any elementary symmetric polynomial is
stable [COSW04, Theorem 9.1], but a normalized Schur polynomial need not be stable [HMMS,
Example 9].

   Let PHdn be the projectivization of Hdn equipped with the quotient topology. The image PLdn
of Ldn in the projective space is homeomorphic to the intersection of Ldn with the unit sphere in
Hdn for the Euclidean norm on the coefficients.

Theorem 2.28. The space PLdn is compact and contractible.

Proof. Since PHdn is compact, Theorem 2.25 implies that PLdn is compact. A deformation retract
of PLdn can be constructed using Theorem 2.10.                                              □

  We conjecture that PLdn is homeomorphic to a familiar space.

Conjecture 2.29. The space PLdn is homeomorphic to a closed Euclidean ball.

   For other appearances of stratified Euclidean balls in the interface of analysis of combina-
torics, see [GKL, GKL19] and references therein. Prominent examples are the totally nonnega-
tive parts of Grassmannian and other partial flag varieties.
   Let f be a polynomial in n variables with nonnegative coefficients. In [Gur09], Gurvits de-
fines f to be strongly log-concave if, for all α P Nn ,
                        B α f is identically zero or logpB α f q is concave on Rną0 .
In [AOVI], Anari et al. define f to be completely log-concave if, for all m P N and any m ˆ n matrix
paij q with nonnegative entries,
               ´źm    ¯                             ´´ źm     ¯ ¯
                   Di f is identically zero or log         Di f is concave on Rną0 ,
                 i“1                                          i“1
                                           řn
where Di is the differential operator j“1 aij Bj . We show that the two notions agree with each
other and with the Lorentzian property for homogeneous polynomials.8

Theorem 2.30. The following conditions are equivalent for any homogeneous polynomial f .
  8An implication similar to p3q ñ p1q of Theorem 2.30 can be found in [ALOVIII, Theorem 3.2].
24                                    PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


(1) f is completely log-concave.
(2) f is strongly log-concave.
(3) f is Lorentzian.

   The support of any Lorentzian polynomial is M-convex by Theorem 2.25. Thus, by Theorem
2.30, the same holds for any strongly log-concave homogeneous polynomial. This answers a
question of Gurvits [Gur09, Section 4.5 (iii)].

Corollary 2.31. The support of any strongly log-concave homogeneous polynomial is M-convex.

  Similarly, we can use Theorem 2.30 to show that the class of strongly log-concave homoge-
neous polynomials is closed under multiplication. This answers another question of Gurvits
[Gur09, Section 4.5 (iv)] for homogeneous polynomials.

Corollary 2.32. The product of strongly log-concave homogeneous polynomials is strongly log-
concave.

Proof. Let f pwq be an element of Ldn , and let gpwq be an element of Len . It is straightforward to
check that f pwqgpuq is an element of Ld`e
                                        n`n , where u is a set of variables disjoint from w. It follows
that f pwqgpwq is an element of Ld`e
                                  n   , since setting u “ w preserves the Lorentzian property by
Theorem 2.10.                                                                                         □

   Corollary 2.32 extends the following theorem of Liggett [Lig97, Theorem 2]: The convolu-
tion product of two ultra log-concave sequences with no internal zeros is an ultra log-concave
sequence with no internal zeros.
  To prove Theorem 2.30, we use the following elementary observation. Let f be a homoge-
neous polynomial in n ě 2 variables of degree d ě 2.

Proposition 2.33. The following are equivalent for any w P Rn satisfying f pwq ą 0.

(1) The Hessian of f 1{d is negative semidefinite at w.
(2) The Hessian of log f is negative semidefinite at w.
(3) The Hessian of f has exactly one positive eigenvalue at w.

     The equivalence of (2) and (3) appears in [AOVI].

Proof. We fix w throughout the proof. For n ˆ n symmetric matrices A and B, we write A ă B
to mean the following interlacing relationship between the eigenvalues of A and B:
                       λ1 pAq ď λ1 pBq ď λ2 pAq ď λ2 pBq ď ¨ ¨ ¨ ď λn pAq ď λn pBq.
Let H1 , H2 , and H3 for the Hessians of f 1{d , log f , and f , respectively. We have
                        1
       df ´1{d H1 “ H2 ` f ´2 pgradf qpgradf qT and H2 “ f ´1 H3 ´ f ´2 pgradf qpgradf qT .
                        d
                                      LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                        25


Since pgradf qpgradf qT is positive semidefinite of rank one, Weyl’s inequalities for Hermitian
matrices [Ser10, Theorem 6.3] show that

                             H2 ă H1 and H2 ă H3 and H1 ă H3 .

Since wT H3 w “ dpd ´ 1qf , H3 has at least one positive eigenvalue, and hence (1) ñ (2) ñ (3).
   For (3) ñ (1), suppose that H3 has exactly one positive eigenvalue. We introduce a positive
real parameter ϵ and consider the polynomial

                                    fϵ “ f ´ ϵpw1d ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` wnd q.

                                                                           1{d
We write H3,ϵ for the Hessian of fϵ , and write H1,ϵ for the Hessian of fϵ .
   Note that H3,ϵ is nonsingular and has exactly one positive eigenvalue for all sufficiently small
positive ϵ. In addition, we have H1,ϵ ă H3,ϵ , and hence H1,ϵ has at most one nonnegative
eigenvalue for all sufficiently small positive ϵ. However, by Euler’s formula for homogeneous
functions, we have

                                             H1,ϵ w “ 0,

so that 0 is the only nonnegative eigenvalue of H1,ϵ for any such ϵ. The implication (3) ñ (1)
now follows by limiting ϵ to 0.                                                             □


  It follows that, for any nonzero degree d ě 2 homogeneous polynomial f with nonnegative
coefficients, the following conditions are equivalent:

– The function f 1{d is concave on Rną0 .
– The function log f is concave on Rną0 .
– The Hessian of f has exactly one positive eigenvalue on Rną0 .


Proof of Theorem 2.30. We may suppose that f has degree d ě 2. Clearly, completely log-concave
polynomials are strongly log-concave.
   Suppose f is a strongly log-concave homogeneous polynomial of degree d. By Proposition
2.33, either B α f is identically zero or the Hessian of B α f has exactly one positive eigenvalue on
                                                 `      ˘
Rną0 for all α P Nn . By Proposition 2.17, f is 2 1 ´ d1 -Rayleigh, and hence, by Theorem 2.23, the
support of f is M-convex. Therefore, by Theorem 2.25, f is Lorentzian.
   Suppose f is a nonzero Lorentzian polynomial. Theorem 2.16 and Proposition 2.33 together
                                                                           ` řn        ˘
show that log f is concave on Rną0 . Therefore, it is enough to prove that    i“1 ai Bi f is Lorentzian
for any nonnegative numbers a1 , . . . , an . This is a direct consequence of Theorem 2.25 and
Corollary 2.11.                                                                                     □
26                                     PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


                                         3. A DVANCED THEORY

3.1. Linear operators preserving Lorentzian polynomials. We describe a large class of linear
operators that preserve the Lorentzian property. An analog was achieved for the class of sta-
ble polynomials in [BB09, Theorem 2.2], where the linear operators preserving stability were
characterized. For an element κ of Nn , we set
                     !                                                                )
          Rκ rwi s “ polynomials in Rrwi s1ďiďn of degree at most κi in wi for every i ,
                     !                                               )
         Raκ rwij s “ multi-affine polynomials in Rrwij s1ďiďn,1ďjďκi .

The projection operator ΠÓκ : Raκ rwij s Ñ Rκ rwi s is the linear map that substitutes each wij by wi :

                                            ΠÓκ pgq “ g|wij “wi .

The polarization operator ΠÒκ : Rκ rwi s Ñ Raκ rwij s is the linear map that sends wα to the product
                n
        1 ź`                                                                           ˘
       `κ˘   elementary symmetric polynomial of degree αi in the variables twij u1ďjďκi ,
        α   i“1
         `κ˘                                                        śn   κi
                                                                         ` ˘
where       α   stands for the product of binomial coefficients      i“1 αi    . Note that

– for every f , we have ΠÓκ ˝ ΠÒκ pf q “ f , and
– for every f and every i, the polynomial ΠÒκ pf q is symmetric in the variables twij u1ďjďκi .

The above properties characterize ΠÒκ among the linear operators from Rκ rwi s to Raκ rwij s.

Proposition 3.1. The operators ΠÓκ and ΠÒκ preserve the Lorentzian property.

  In other words, ΠÒκ pf q is a Lorentzian polynomial for any Lorentzian polynomial f P Rκ rwi s,
and ΠÓκ pgq is a Lorentzian polynomial for any Lorentzian polynomial g P Raκ rwij s.

Proof. The statement for ΠÓκ follows from Theorem 2.10. We prove the statement for ΠÒκ . It is
enough to prove that ΠÒκ pf q is Lorentzian when f P L̊dn X Rκ rwi s for d ě 2.
     Set k “ |κ|1 , and identify Nk with the set of all monomials in wij . Since f P L̊dn , we have
                                                           „ ȷ
                                               ` Ò ˘        k
                                          supp Πκ pf q “       ,
                                                            d
which is clearly M-convex. Therefore, by Theorem 2.25, it remains to show that the quadratic
                                       “ k ‰
form B β ΠÒκ pf q is stable for any β P d´2  .
   Define α by the equality ΠÓκ pwβ q “ wα . Note that, after renaming the variables if necessary,
the β-th partial derivative of ΠÒκ pf q is a positive multiple of a polarization of the α-th partial
derivative of f :
                                                 pκ ´ αq! Ò
                                  B β ΠÒκ pf q “         Πκ´α pB α f q.
                                                    κ!
Since the operator ΠÒκ´α preserves stability [BB09, Proposition 3.4], the conclusion follows from
the stability of the quadratic form B α f .                                                       □
                                        LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                          27


   Let κ be an element of Nn , let γ be an element of Nm , and set k “ |κ|1 . In the remainder of
this section, we fix a linear operator
                                         T : Rκ rwi s Ñ Rγ rwi s,
and suppose that the linear operator T is homogeneous of degree ℓ for some ℓ P Z:
                  ´                          ¯
                   0 ď α ď κ and T pwα q ‰ 0 ùñ deg T pwα q “ deg wα ` ℓ.

The symbol of T is a homogeneous polynomial of degree k ` ℓ in m ` n variables defined by
                                           ÿ ˆκ˙
                           symT pw, uq “           T pwα quκ´α .
                                         0ďαďκ
                                                α
We show that the homogeneous operator T preserves the Lorentzian property if its symbol
symT is Lorentzian.

Theorem 3.2. If symT P Lk`ℓ          d                            d`ℓ
                        m`n and f P Ln X Rκ rwi s, then T pf q P Lm .


  When n “ 2, Theorem 3.2 provides a large class of linear operators that preserve the ultra log-
concavity of sequences of nonnegative numbers with no internal zeros. We prepare the proof of
Theorem 3.2 with a special case.

Lemma 3.3. Let T “ Tw1 ,w2 : Rp1,...,1q rwi s Ñ Rp1,...,1q rwi s be the linear operator defined by
                             $ Sz1
                             ’
                             ’  w         if 1 P S and 2 P S,
                             ’
                             & wSz1 if 1 P S and 2 R S,
                  T pwS q “                                          for all S Ď rns.
                             ’
                             ’
                             ’  wSz2 if 1 R S and 2 P S,
                             %
                                   0      if 1 R S and 2 R S,
Then T preserves the Lorentzian property.

Proof. It is enough to prove that T pf q P Ldn when f P L̊d`1
                                                          n   X Rp1,...,1q rwi s for d ě 2. In this case,
                        `     ˘ ␣                                                  (
                   supp T pf q “ d-element subsets of rns not containing 1 ,
which is clearly M-convex. Therefore, by Theorem 2.25, it suffices to show that the quadratic
                                      “ n ‰
form B S T pf q is stable for any S P d´2   not containing 1. We write h for the Lorentzian polyno-
mial f |w1 “0 . Since f is multi-affine, we have
                               f “ h ` w1 B1 f and T pf q “ B2 h ` B1 f.
We give separate arguments when 2 P S and 2 R S. If S contains 2, then
                                           B S T pf q “ B SY1 f,
and hence B S T pf q is stable. If S does not contain 2, then

– the linear form B S B1 B2 f “ B SY1Y2 f is not identically zero, because f P L̊d`1
                                                                                 n ,

– we have B SY1Y2 f ă B SY2 h, because B SY2 f is stable, and
– we have B SY1Y2 f ă B SY1 f , by Lemma 2.9 (1).
28                                         PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


Therefore, by Lemma 2.9 (4), the quadratic form B S T pf q “ B SY2 h ` B SY1 f is stable.                              □

Proof of Theorem 3.2. The polarization of T : Rκ rwi s Ñ Rγ rwi s is the operator ΠÒ pT q defined by
                                               ΠÒ pT q “ ΠÒγ ˝ T ˝ ΠÓκ .
We write γ ‘ κ for the concatenation of γ and κ in Nm`n . By [BB09, Lemma 3.5], the symbol of
the polarization is the polarization of the symbol9:
                                           symΠÒ pT q “ ΠÒγ ‘ κ psymT q.
Therefore, by Proposition 3.1, the proof reduces to the case κ “ p1, . . . , 1q and γ “ p1, . . . , 1q.
   Suppose f pvq is a multi-affine polynomial in Ldn and symT pw, uq is a multi-affine polynomial
in Lℓ`n
    m`n . Since the product of Lorentzian polynomials is Lorentzian by Corollary 2.32, we have
                                          ÿ
                                                                      d`ℓ`n
                       symT pw, uqf pvq “      T pwS qurnszS f pvq P Lm`n`n .
                                                   SĎrns

Applying the operator in Lemma 3.3 for the pair of variables pui , vi q for i “ 1, . . . , n, we have
                        n
                        ź                                ÿ
                                     `                ˘
                              Tui ,vi symT pw, uqf pvq “   T pwS qpB S f qpvq P Ld`ℓ
                                                                                 m`n .
                        i“1                                 SĎrns

We substitute every vi by zero in the displayed equation to get
                            ” ÿ                       ı     `    ˘
                                    T pwS qpB S f qpvq  “ T f pwq .
                                                                v“0
                                      SĎrns

Theorem 2.10 shows that the right-hand side belongs to Ld`ℓ
                                                        m , completing the proof.                                      □

  We remark that there are homogeneous linear operators T preserving the Lorentzian property
whose symbols are not Lorentzian. This contrasts the analog of Theorem 3.2 for stable polyno-
mials [BB09, Theorem 2.2]. As an example, consider the linear operator T : Rp1,1q rw1 , w2 s Ñ
Rp1,1q rw1 , w2 s defined by
                       T p1q “ 0,     T pw1 q “ w1 ,    T pw2 q “ w2 ,     T pw1 w2 q “ w1 w2 .
The symbol of T is not Lorentzian because its support is not M-convex. The operator T preserves
Lorentzian polynomials but does not preserve (non-homogeneous) stable polynomials.

Theorem 3.4. If T is a homogeneous linear operator that preserves stable polynomials and poly-
nomials with nonnegative coefficients, then T preserves Lorentzian polynomials.

Proof. According to [BB09, Theorem 2.2], T preserves stable polynomials if and only if either

     (I) the rank of T is not greater than two and T is of the form
                                              T pf q “ αpf qP ` βpf qQ,
        where α, β are linear functionals and P, Q are stable polynomials satisfying P ă Q,
     9The statement was proved in [BB09, Lemma 3.5] when m “ n. Clearly, this special case implies the general case.
                                     LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                      29


 (II) the polynomial symT pw, uq is stable, or
(III) the polynomial symT pw, ´uq is stable.

Suppose one of the three conditions, and suppose in addition that T preserves polynomials with
nonnegative coefficients.
   Suppose (I) holds. In this case, the image of T is contained in the set of stable polynomials
[BB10, Theorem 1.6]. By Proposition 2.2, homogeneous stable polynomials with nonnegative
coefficients are Lorentzian. Since T preserves polynomials with nonnegative coefficients, T pf q
is Lorentzian whenever f is a homogeneous polynomial with nonnegative coefficients.
   Suppose (II) holds. Since T preserves polynomials with nonnegative coefficients, symT pw, uq
is Lorentzian by Proposition 2.2. Therefore, by Theorem 3.2, T pf q is Lorentzian whenever f is
Lorentzian.
  Suppose (III) holds. Since all the nonzero coefficients of a homogeneous stable polynomial
have the same sign [COSW04, Theorem 6.1], we have
                 symT pw, ´vq “ symT pw, vq or symT pw, ´vq “ ´symT pw, vq.
In both cases, symT pw, vq is stable and has nonnegative coefficients. Thus symT pw, vq is Lorentzian,
and the conclusion follows from Theorem 3.2.                                                     □

  In the remainder of this section, we record some useful operators that preserves the Lorentzian
property. The multi-affine part of a polynomial αPNn cα wα is the polynomial αPt0,1un cα wα .
                                                ř                             ř

Corollary 3.5. The multi-affine part of any Lorentzian polynomial is a Lorentzian polynomial.

Proof. Clearly, taking the multi-affine part is a homogeneous linear operator that preserves poly-
nomials with nonnegative coefficients. Since this operator also preserves stable polynomials
[COSW04, Proposition 4.17], the proof follows from Theorem 3.4.                                 □

Remark 3.6. Corollary 3.5 can be used to obtain a multi-affine analog of Theorem 2.28. Write Hdn
for the space of multi-affine degree d homogeneous polynomials in n variables, and write Ldn for
the corresponding set of multi-affine Lorentzian polynomials. Let PHdn be the projectivization
of the vector space Hdn , and let LB be the set of polynomials in Ldn with support B. We identify
a rank d matroid M on rns with its set of bases B Ď nd . Writing PLdn and PLB for the images of
                                                       “ ‰

Ldn z0 and LB in PHdn respectively, we have
                                                  ž
                                          PLdn “     PLB ,
                                                 B

where the union is over all rank d matroids on rns. By Theorem 2.10 and Corollary 3.5, PLdn
is a compact contractible subset of PHdn . By Theorem 3.10, PLB is nonempty for every matroid
B Ď nd . In addition, by Proposition 3.25, PLB is contractible for every matroid B Ď nd .
      “ ‰                                                                           “ ‰

                                                                      α
   Let N be the linear operator defined by the condition N pwα q “ wα! . The normalization oper-
ator N turns generating functions into exponential generating functions.
30                                  PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


Corollary 3.7. If f is a Lorentzian polynomial, then N pf q is a Lorentzian polynomial.

   It is shown in [HMMS, Theorem 3] that the normalized Schur polynomial N psλ pw1 , . . . , wn qq
is Lorentzian for any partition λ. Note that the converse of Corollary 3.7 fails in general. For
example, complete symmetric polynomials, which are special cases of Schur polynomials, need
not be Lorentzian.

Proof. Let κ be any element of Nn . By Theorem 3.2, it suffices to show that the symbol
                                                             ÿ ˆ κj ˙ wjαj κ ´α
                                                       ˜                            ¸
                             ÿ ˆκ˙ wα             źn
             symN pw, uq “                uκ´α “                            u  j  j


                           0ďαďκ
                                    α α!          j“1    0ďα ďκ
                                                                    αj αj ! j
                                                                   j   j


is a Lorentzian polynomial. Since the product of Lorentzian polynomials is Lorentzian by Corol-
lary 2.32, the proof is reduced to the case when the symbol is bivariate. In this case, using the
characterization of bivariate Lorentzian polynomials in Example 2.26, we get the Lorentzian
property from the log-concavity of the sequence 1{k!.                                          □

   Corollary 3.8 below extends the classical fact that the convolution product of two log-concave
sequences with no internal zeros is a log-concave sequence with no internal zeros. For early
proofs of the classical fact, see [Kar68, Chapter 8] and [Men69].

Corollary 3.8. If N pf q and N pgq are Lorentzian polynomials, then N pf gq is a Lorentzian poly-
nomial.

   Note that the analogous statement for stable polynomials fails to hold in general. For exam-
ple, when f “ x3 ` x2 y ` xy 2 ` y 3 , the polynomial N pf q is stable but N pf 2 q is not.

Proof. Suppose that f and g belong to Rκ rwi s. We consider the linear operator

                           T : Rκ rwi s ÝÑ Rrwi s,       N phq ÞÝÑ N phgq.

By Theorem 3.2, it is enough to show that its symbol
                                                 ÿ                  uκ´α
                             symT pw, uq “ κ!           N pwα gq
                                                0ďαďκ
                                                                   pκ ´ αq!

is a Lorentzian polynomial in 2n variables. For this, we consider the linear operator
                                                              ÿ                    uκ´α
                S : Rκ rwi s ÝÑ Rrwi , ui s,    N phq ÞÝÑ              N pwα hq            .
                                                            0ďαďκ
                                                                                  pκ ´ αq!

By Theorem 3.2, it is enough to show that its symbol
                                           ÿ     ÿ    wα`β     uκ´α     v κ´β
                   symS pw, u, vq “ κ!
                                         0ďβďκ 0ďαďκ
                                                     pα ` βq! pκ ´ αq! pκ ´ βq!

is a Lorentzian polynomial in 3n variables. The statement is straightforward to check using
Theorem 2.25. See Theorem 3.10 below for a more general statement.                        □
                                          LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                       31


   The symmetric exclusion process is one of the main models considered in interacting particle
systems. It is a continuous time Markov chain which models particles that jump symmetrically
between sites, where each site may be occupied by at most one particle [Lig10]. A problem
that has attracted much attention is to find negative dependence properties that are preserved
under the symmetric exclusion process. In [BBL09, Theorem 4.20], it was proved that strongly
Rayleigh measures are preserved under the symmetric exclusion process. In other words, if
f “ f pw1 , w2 , . . . , wn q is a stable multi-affine polynomial with nonnegative coefficients, then the
multi-affine polynomial Φ1,2       θ pf q defined by

                 Φ1,2
                  θ pf q “ p1 ´ θqf pw1 , w2 , w3 , . . . , wn q ` θf pw2 , w1 , w3 , . . . , wn q

is stable for all 0 ď θ ď 1. We prove an analog for Lorentzian polynomials.

Corollary 3.9. Let f “ f pw1 , w2 , . . . , wn q be a multi-affine polynomial with nonnegative coef-
ficients. If the homogenization of f is a Lorentzian polynomial, then the homogenization of
Φ1,2
  θ pf q is a Lorentzian polynomial for all 0 ď θ ď 1.


Proof. Recall that a polynomial with nonnegative coefficients is stable if and only if its homoge-
nization is stable [BBL09, Theorem 4.5]. Clearly, Φ1,2
                                                   θ is homogeneous and preserves polynomi-
                                           1,2
als with nonnegative coefficients. Since Φθ preserves stability of multi-affine polynomials by
[BBL09, Theorem 4.20], the statement follows from Theorem 3.4.                                  □

3.2. Matroids, M-convex sets, and Lorentzian polynomials. The generating function of a subset
J Ď Nn is, by definition,
                                   ÿ wα                źn
                              fJ “        , where α! “     αi !.
                                   αPJ
                                       α!              i“1

We characterize matroids and M-convex sets in terms of their generating functions.

Theorem 3.10. The following are equivalent for any nonempty J Ď Nn .

(1) There is a Lorentzian polynomial whose support is J.
(2) There is a homogeneous 2-Rayleigh polynomial whose support is J.
(3) There is a homogeneous c-Rayleigh polynomial whose support is J for some c ą 0.
(4) The generating function fJ is a Lorentzian polynomial.
(5) The generating function fJ is a homogeneous 2-Rayleigh polynomial.
(6) The generating function fJ is a homogeneous c-Rayleigh polynomial for some c ą 0.
(7) J is M-convex.

When J Ď t0, 1un , any one of the above conditions is equivalent to

(8) J is the set of bases of a matroid on rns.
32                                 PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


   The statement that the basis generating polynomial fJ is log-concave on the positive orthant
can be found in [AOVI, Theorem 4.2]. An equivalent statement that the Hessian fJ has ex-
actly one positive eigenvalue on the positive orthant has been noted earlier in [HW17, Remark
15]. The equivalence of the conditions (4) and (7) will be generalized to M-convex functions in
Theorem 3.14.
     We prepare the proof of Theorem 3.10 with an analysis of the quadratic case.

Lemma 3.11. The following conditions are equivalent for any n ˆ n symmetric matrix A with
entries in t0, 1u.

(1) The quadratic polynomial wT Aw is Lorentzian.
(2) The support of the quadratic polynomial wT Aw is M-convex.

Proof. Theorem 2.25 implies (1) ñ (2). We prove (2) ñ (1). We may and will suppose that no
column of A is zero. Let J be the M-convex support of wT Aw, and set
                                        !                 )
                                     S “ i P rns | 2ei P J .

The exchange property for J shows that ei ` ej P J for every i P S and j P rns. In addition, again
by the exchange property for J,
                                 !                               )
                             B :“ ei ` ej P J | i R S and j R S

is the set of bases of a rank 2 matroid on rnszS without loops. Writing S1 Y ¨ ¨ ¨ Y Sk for the
decomposition of rnszS into parallel classes in the matroid, we have
                               ´ ÿ     ¯2 ´ ÿ        ¯2         ´ ÿ    ¯2
                     wT Aw “         wj ´          wj ´ ¨ ¨ ¨ ´      wj ,
                                 jPrns         jPS1                jPSk

and hence wT Aw is a Lorentzian polynomial.                                                     □

Proof of Theorem 3.10. Theorem 2.23, Theorem 2.25, and Proposition 2.19 show that

                        p1q ñ p2q ñ p3q ñ p7q and p4q ñ p5q ñ p6q ñ p7q.

Since (4) ñ (1), we only need to prove (7) ñ (4).
   If J is an M-convex subset of Nn , then fJ is a homogeneous polynomial of some degree d.
Suppose d ě 2, and let α be an element of ∆d´2                                           α
                                              n . Note that, in general, the support of B fJ is
                                                                 α
M-convex whenever the support of fJ is M-convex. Therefore, B fJ is Lorentzian by Lemma
3.11, and hence fJ is Lorentzian by Theorem 2.25.                                            □

   Let J be the set of bases of a matroid M on rns. If M is regular [FM92], if M is representable
over the finite fields F3 and F4 [COSW04], if the rank of M is at most 3 [Wag05], or if the number
of elements n is at most 7 [Wag05], then fJ is 1-Rayleigh. Seymour and Welsh found the first
example of a matroid whose basis generating function is not 1-Rayleigh [SW75]. We propose
the following improvement of Theorem 3.10.
                                      LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                       33


Conjecture 3.12. The following conditions are equivalent for any nonempty J Ď t0, 1un .

(1) J is the set of bases of a matroid on rns.
(2) The generating function fJ is a homogeneous 87 -Rayleigh polynomial.

  The constant 87 is best possible: For any positive real number c ă 87 , there is a matroid whose
basis generating function is not c-Rayleigh [HSW, Theorem 7].

3.3. Valuated matroids, M-convex functions, and Lorentzian polynomials. Let ν be a function
from Nn to R Y t8u. The effective domain of ν is, by definition,
                                          !                      )
                                dompνq “ α P Nn | νpαq ă 8 .

The function ν is said to be M-convex if satisfies the symmetric exchange property:

(1) For any α, β P dompνq and any i satisfying αi ą βi , there is j satisfying

                   αj ă βj and νpαq ` νpβq ě νpα ´ ei ` ej q ` νpβ ´ ej ` ei q.

Note that the effective domain of an M-convex function on Nn is an M-convex subset of Nn . In
particular, the effective domain of an M-convex function on Nn is contained in ∆dn for some d. In
this case, we identify ν with its restriction to ∆dn . When the effective domain of ν is is M-convex,
the symmetric exchange property for ν is equivalent to the following local exchange property:

(2) For any α, β P dompνq with |α ´ β|1 “ 4, there are i and j satisfying

              αi ą βi , αj ă βj and νpαq ` νpβq ě νpα ´ ei ` ej q ` νpβ ´ ej ` ei q.

A proof of the equivalence of the two exchange properties can be found in [Mur03, Section 6.2].

Example 3.13. The indicator function of J Ď Nn is the function νJ : Nn Ñ R Y t8u defined by
                                            #
                                              0 if α P J,
                                   νJ pαq “
                                              8 if α R J.
Clearly, J Ď Nn is M-convex if and only if the indicator function νJ is M-convex.

   A function ν : Nn Ñ R Y t´8u is said to be M-concave if ´ν is M-convex. The effective domain
of an M-concave function is
                                        !                     )
                             dompνq “ α P Nn | νpαq ą ´8 .

A valuated matroid on rns is an M-concave function on Nn whose effective domain is a nonempty
subset of t0, 1un . The effective domain of a valuated matroid ν on rns is the set of bases of a
matroid on rns, the underlying matroid of ν.
   In this section, we prove that the class of tropicalized Lorentzian polynomials coincides with
the class of M-convex functions. The tropical connection is used to produce Lorentzian polyno-
mials from M-convex functions. First, we state a classical version of the result. For any function
34                                       PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


ν : ∆dn Ñ R Y t8u and a positive real number q, we define
                                         q νpαq α
                                                                            ˆ ˙
                                ÿ                                   ÿ        δ νpαq α
                  fqν pwq “                    w and gqν pwq “                  q  w ,
                                           α!                                α
                              αPdompνq                           αPdompνq
                                                                       śn ` ˘
where δ “ pd, . . . , dq and α is the product of binomial coefficients i“1 αd i . When ν is the
                              `δ ˘

indicator function of J Ď Nn , the polynomial fqν is independent of q and equal to the generating
function fJ considered in Section 3.2.

Theorem 3.14. The following conditions are equivalent for ν : ∆dn Ñ R Y t8u.

(1) The function ν is M-convex.
(2) The polynomial fqν pwq is Lorentzian for all 0 ă q ď 1.
(3) The polynomial gqν pwq is Lorentzian for all 0 ă q ď 1.

   The proof of Theorem 3.14, which relies on the theory of phylogenetic trees and the problem
of isometric embeddings of finite metric spaces in Euclidean spaces, will be given at the end of
this subsection.

Example 3.15. A function µ from Nn to R Y t8u is said to be M6 -convex if, for some positive
integer d, the function ν from Nn`1 to R Y t8u defined by
                                                  #
                                                    µpα1 , . . . , αn q if α P ∆dn`1 ,
                       νpα0 , α1 , . . . , αn q “
                                                           8            if α R ∆dn`1 ,

is M-convex. The condition does not depend on d, and M6 -concave functions are defined simi-
larly. We refer to [Mur03, Chapter 6] for more on M6 -convex and M6 -concave functions.
   It can be shown that every matroid rank function rkM , viewed as a function on Nn with the
effective domain t0, 1un , is M6 -concave. See [Shi12, Section 3] for an elementary proof and other
related results. Thus, by Theorem 3.14, the normalized rank generating function
             ÿ      1 ´rkM pAq A cpAq
                        q        w w0 , where w “ pw1 , . . . , wn q and cpAq “ n ´ |A|,
                  cpAq!
          AĎrns

is Lorentzian for all 0 ă q ď 1. We will obtain a sharper result on rkM in Section 4.3.

  Theorem 3.14 provides a useful sufficient condition for a homogeneous polynomial to be
Lorentzian. Let f be an arbitrary homogeneous polynomial with nonnegative real coefficients
written in the normalized form
                                           ÿ cα
                                      f“          wα .
                                             d
                                               α!
                                                   αP∆n

We define a discrete function νf using natural logarithms of the normalized coefficients:

                              νf : ∆dn ÝÑ R Y t´8u,           α ÞÝÑ logpcα q.

Corollary 3.16. If νf is an M-concave function, then f is a Lorentzian polynomial.
                                              LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                          35

                                                   ř                q ´νf pαq α
Proof. By Theorem 3.14, the polynomial                 αPdompνf q      α!    w is Lorentzian when q “ e´1 .   □

   We note that the converse of Corollary 3.16 does not hold. For example, the polynomial
                                                       n´1
                                                       ź
                                                 f“           pwi ` wn q
                                                        i“1

is Lorentzian, being a product of Lorentzian polynomials. However, νf fails to be M-concave
when n ą 2.
   We formulate a tropical counterpart of Theorem 3.14. Let Cpptqqconv be the field of Laurent
series with complex coefficients that have a positive radius of convergence around 0. By defini-
tion, any nonzero element of Cpptqqconv is a series of the form
                                       sptq “ c1 ta1 ` c2 ta2 ` c3 ta3 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ,
where c1 , c2 , . . . are nonzero complex numbers and a1 ă a2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ are integers, that converges
on a punctured open disk centered at 0. Let Rpptqqconv be the subfield of elements that have real
coefficients. We define the fields of real and complex convergent Puiseux series10 by
                                  ď                        ď
                             K“     Rppt1{k qqconv and K “   Cppt1{k qqconv .
                                   kě1                                 kě1

Any nonzero element of K is a series of the form
                                       sptq “ c1 ta1 ` c2 ta2 ` c3 ta3 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ,
where c1 , c2 , . . . are nonzero complex numbers and a1 ă a2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ are rational numbers that
have a common denominator. The leading coefficient of sptq is c1 , and the leading exponent of sptq
is a1 . A nonzero element of K is positive if its leading coefficient is positive. The valuation map is
the function
                                        val : K ÝÑ R Y t8u,
that takes the zero element to 8 and a nonzero element to its leading exponent. For a nonzero
element sptq P K, we have
                                     `    ˘          `     ˘
                                  val sptq “ lim logt sptq .
                                                          tÑ0`

    The field K is algebraically closed, and the field K is real closed. See [Spe05, Section 1.5]
and references therein. Since the theory of real closed fields has quantifier elimination [Mar02,
Section 3.3], for any first-order formula φpx1 , . . . , xm q in the language of ordered fields and any
s1 ptq, . . . , sm ptq P K, we have
   ´                                         ¯
     φps1 ptq, . . . , sm ptqq holds in K ðñ
                 ´                                                                                        ¯
                   φps1 pqq, . . . , sm pqqq holds in R for all sufficiently small positive real numbers q .
In particular, Tarski’s principle holds for K: A first-order sentence in the language of ordered
fields holds in K if and only if it holds in R.
   10The main statements in this section are valid over the field of formal Puiseux series as well.
36                                          PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


Definition 3.17. Let ft “ αP∆dn sα ptqwα be a nonzero homogeneous polynomial with coeffi-
                             ř

cients in Kě0 . The tropicalization of ft is the discrete function defined by
                                                                       `     ˘
                         troppft q : ∆dn ÝÑ R Y t8u,         α ÞÝÑ val sα ptq .
We say that ft is log-concave on Kną0 if the function logpfq q is concave on Rną0 for all sufficiently
small positive real numbers q.

  Note that the support of ft is the effective domain of the tropicalization of ft . We write
 d
Mn pKq for the set of all degree d homogeneous polynomials in Kě0 rw1 , . . . , wn s whose support
is M-convex.
Definition 3.18 (Lorentzian polynomials over K). We set L0n pKq “ M0n pKq, L1n pKq “ M1n pKq, and
                  !                                                                   )
        L2n pKq “ ft P M2n pKq | The Hessian of ft has at most one eigenvalue in Ką0 .

For d ě 3, we define Ldn pKq by setting
                              !                                                )
                    Ldn pKq “ ft P Mdn pKq | B α ft P L2n pKq for all α P ∆d´2
                                                                           n    .

The polynomials in Ldn pKq will be called Lorentzian.

   By Proposition 2.33, the log-concavity of homogeneous polynomials can be expressed in the
first-order language of ordered fields. It follows that the analog of Theorem 2.30 holds for any
homogeneous polynomial ft with coefficients in Kě0 .
Theorem 3.19. The following conditions are equivalent for ft .

(1) For any m P N and any m ˆ n matrix paij q with entries in Kě0 ,
             ´ m
               ź ¯                               m
                                                ´ź    ¯
                   Di ft is identically zero or    Di ft is log-concave on Kną0 ,
                     i“1                                      i“1
                                                    řn
      where Di is the differential operator            j“1 aij Bj .

(2) For any α P Nn , the polynomial B α ft is identically zero or log-concave on Kną0 .
(3) The polynomial ft is Lorentzian.

   The field K is real closed, and the field K is algebraically closed [Spe05, Section 1.5]. Any
element sptq of K can be written as a sum
                                                  sptq “ pptq ` i qptq,
where pptq P K is the real part of sptq and qptq P K is the imaginary part of sptq. The open upper
half plane in K is the set of elements in K with positive imaginary parts. A polynomial ft in
Krw1 , . . . , wn s is stable if ft is non-vanishing on HK
                                                         n
                                                           or identically zero, where HK is the open
upper half plane in K. According to [Brä10, Theorem 4], tropicalizations of homogeneous stable
polynomials over K are M-convex functions.11 Here we prove that tropicalizations of Lorentzian
     11In [Brä10], the field of formal Puiseux series with real exponents Rttu containing K was used. The tropicalization

used in [Brä10] differs from ours by a sign.
                                               LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                                    37


polynomials over K are M-convex, and that all M-convex functions are limits of tropicalizations
of Lorentzian polynomials over K.12

Theorem 3.20. The following conditions are equivalent for any function ν : ∆dn Ñ Q Y t8u.

  (i) The function ν is M-convex.
 (ii) There is a Lorentzian polynomial in Krw1 , . . . , wn s whose tropicalization is ν.

   Let M be a matroid with the set of bases B. The Dressian of M, denoted DrpMq, is the tropical
variety in RB obtained by intersecting the tropical hypersurfaces of the Plücker relations in RB
[MS15, Section 4.4]. Since DrpMq is a rational polyhedral fan whose points bijectively correspond
to the valuated matroids with underlying matroid M, Theorem 3.20 shows that
                         !                                                               )
        DrpMq “ closure ´ troppft q | ft is a Lorentzian polynomial with supppft q “ B .
We note that the corresponding statement for stable polynomials fails to hold. For example,
when M is the Fano plane, there is no stable polynomial whose support is B [Brä07, Section 6].
   We prove Theorems 3.14 and 3.20 together after reviewing the needed results on the space
of phylogenetic trees and the isometric embeddings of finite metric spaces in Euclidean spaces.
A phylogenetic tree with n leaves is a tree with n labelled leaves and no vertices of degree 2. A
function d : n2 Ñ R is a tree distance if there is a phylogenetic tree τ with n leaves and edge
              “ ‰

weights ℓe P R such that
                  ´                                                                     ¯
       dpi, jq “ the sum of all ℓe along the unique path in τ joining the leaves i and j .
                                                                         n
The space of phylogenetic trees Tn is the set of all tree distances in Rp 2 q . The Fundamental Theorem
of Phylogenetics shows that
                                              Tn “ Drp2, nq,
where Drp2, nq is the Dressian of the rank 2 uniform matroid on rns [MS15, Section 4.3].
  We give a spectral characterization of tree distances. For any function d : n2 Ñ R and any
                                                                             “ ‰

positive real number q, we define an n ˆ n symmetric matrix Hq pdq by
                                            #
                                                  0     if i “ j,
                                 Hq pdqij “
                                               q dpi,jq if i ‰ j.
We say that an n ˆ n symmetric matrix H is conditionally negative definite if
                                         p1, . . . , 1qw “ 0 ùñ wT Hw ď 0.
Basic properties of conditionally negative definite matrices are collected in [BR97, Chapter 4].

Lemma 3.21. The following conditions are equivalent for any function d : n2 Ñ R.
                                                                             “ ‰

   12If Rttu is used instead of K, then all M-convex functions are tropicalizations of Lorentzian polynomials. More

precisely, a discrete function ν with values in R Y t8u is M-convex if and only if there is a Lorentzian polynomial over
Rttu whose tropicalization is ν. In this setting, the Dressian of a matroid M can be identified with the set of tropicalized
Lorentzian polynomials ft with supppft q “ B, where B is the set of bases of M.
38                                           PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


(1) The matrix Hq pdq has exactly one positive eigenvalue for all q ě 1.
(2) The function d is a tree distance.

   Lemma 3.21 is closely linked to the problem of isometric embeddings of ultrametric spaces
in Hilbert spaces. Let d be a metric on rns. Since dpi, iq “ 0 and dpi, jq “ dpj, iq for all i, we may
identify d with a function n2 Ñ R. We define an n ˆ n symmetric matrix Epdq by
                           “ ‰

                                                    Epdqij “ dpi, jq2 .
We say that d admits an isometric embedding into Rm if there is ϕ : rns Ñ Rm such that
                                     dpi, jq “ |ϕpiq ´ ϕpjq|2 for all i, j P rns,
where | ¨ |2 is the standard Euclidean norm on Rm . The following theorem of Schoenberg [Sch38]
characterizes metrics on rns that admit an isometric embedding into some Rm .

Theorem 3.22. A metric d on rns admits an isometric embedding into some Rm if and only if
the matrix Epdq is conditionally negative semidefinite.

     Recall that an ultrametric on rns is a metric d on rns such that
                                         !               )
                          dpi, jq ď max dpi, kq, dpj, kq for any i, j, k P rns.

Equivalently, d is an ultrametric if the maximum of dpi, jq, dpi, kq, dpj, kq is attained at least twice
for any i, j, k P rns. Any ultrametric is a tree distance given by a phylogenetic tree [MS15, Section
4.3]. In [TV83], Timan and Vestfrid proved that any separable ultrametric space is isometric to a
subspace of ℓ2 . We use the following special case.

Theorem 3.23. Any ultrametric on rns admits an isometric embedding into Rn´1 .

Proof of Lemma 3.21. We prove (1) ñ (2). We may suppose that d takes rational values. If (1)
holds, then the quadratic polynomial wT Hq pdqw is stable for all q ě 1. Therefore, by the quanti-
fier elimination for the theory of real closed fields, the quadratic form
                                  ÿ
                                     t´dpi,jq wi wj P Krw1 , . . . , wn s
                                           iăj

is stable. By [Brä10, Theorem 4], tropicalizations of stable polynomials are M-convex13, and
hence the function ´d is M-convex. In other words, we have
                                                   d P Drp2, nq “ Tn .

   For (2) ñ (1), we first consider the special case when d is an ultrametric on rns. In this case,
 d
q is also an ultrametric on rns for all q ě 1. It follows from Theorems 3.22 and 3.23 that Hq pdq
is conditionally negative definite for all q ě 1, and Cauchy’s interlacing theorem shows that
conditionally negative definite matrices have at most one positive eigenvalue. In the general
case, we use that Tn is the sum of its linearity space with the space of ultrametrics on rns [MS15,
     13The tropicalization used in [Brä10] differs from ours by a sign.
                                       LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                        39


Lemma 4.3.9]. Thus, for any tree distance d on rns, there is an ultrametric d on rns and real
numbers c1 , . . . , cn such that
                                        n    ´ÿ ¯
                                       ÿ                  n
                                  d“d`    ci    eij P Rp 2 q .
                                              i“1      i‰j

Therefore, the symmetric matrix Hq pdq is congruent to Hq pdq, and the conclusion follows from
the case of ultrametrics.                                                                    □

  We start the proof of Theorems 3.14 and 3.20 with a linear algebraic lemma. Let paij q be an
n ˆ n symmetric matrix with entries in Rą0 .

Lemma 3.24. If paij q has exactly one positive eigenvalue, then paijp q has exactly one positive
eigenvalue for 0 ď p ď 1.

                                                                   a
Proof. If pvi q is the Perron eigenvector of paij q, then p viijvj q is conditionally negative definite
                                         p
                                       aij
[BR97, Lemma 4.4.1]. Therefore, p       p p
                                      vi vj
                                              q is conditionally negative definite [BCR84, Corollary
2.10], and the conclusion follows.                                                                   □

  Let f be a degree d homogeneous polynomial written in the normalized form
                                         ÿ    cα α
                                   f“             w .
                                              α!
                                               αPsupppf q

For any nonnegative real number p, we define
                                                       ÿ         cαp α
                                      Rp pf q “                     w .
                                                                 α!
                                                    αPsupppf q

We use Lemma 3.24 to construct a homotopy from any Lorentzian polynomial to the generating
function of its support. The following proposition was proved in [ALOVII] for strongly log-
concave multi-affine polynomials.

Proposition 3.25. If f is Lorentzian, then Rp pf q is Lorentzian for all 0 ď p ď 1.

Proof. Using the characterization of Lorentzian polynomials in Theorem 2.25, the proof reduces
to the case of quadratic polynomials. Using Theorem 2.10, the proof further reduces to the case
f P P2n . In this case, the assertion is Lemma 3.24.                                         □

   Set m “ nd, and let ν : ∆dn Ñ R Y t8u and µ : ∆dm Ñ R Y t8u be arbitrary functions. Write
eij for the standard unit vectors in Rm with 1 ď i ď n and 1 ď j ď d, and let ϕ be the linear map

                                   ϕ : Rm ÝÑ Rn ,            eij ÞÝÑ ei .

We define the polarization of ν to be the function ΠÒ ν : ∆dm Ñ R Y t8u satisfying
                                         „ ȷ                       „ ȷ
                               ` Ò ˘       m         Ò               m
                          dom Π ν Ď           and Π ν “ ν ˝ ϕ on       .
                                           d                         d
40                                           PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


We define the projection of µ to be the function ΠÓ µ : ∆dn Ñ R Y t8u satisfying
                                                !                )
                                 ΠÓ µpαq “ min µpβq | ϕpβq “ α .

It is straightforward to check the symmetric exchange properties of ΠÒ ν and ΠÓ µ from the sym-
metric exchange properties of ν and µ.14

Lemma 3.26. Let ν : ∆dn Ñ R Y t8u and µ : ∆dm Ñ R Y t8u be arbitrary functions.

(1) If ν is an M-convex function, then ΠÒ ν is an M-convex function.
(2) If µ is an M-convex function, then ΠÓ µ is an M-convex function.

  As a final preparation for the proof of Theorems 3.14 and 3.20, we show that any M-convex
function on ∆dn can be approximated by M-convex functions whose effective domain is ∆dn .

Lemma 3.27. For any M-convex function ν : ∆dn Ñ R Y t8u, there is a sequence of M-convex
functions νk : ∆dn Ñ R such that
                                          lim νk pαq “ νpαq for all α P ∆dn .
                                         kÑ8

The sequence νk can be chosen so that νk “ ν in dompνq and νk ă νk`1 outside dompνq.

Proof. It is enough to prove the case when ν is not the constant function 8. Write eij for the
                            2
standard unit vectors in Rn . Let φ : ∆dn2 Ñ ∆dn and ψ : ∆dn2 Ñ ∆dn be the restrictions of the
                     2
linear maps from Rn to Rn given by
                                            φpeij q “ ei and ψpeij q “ ej .
For any function µ : ∆dn Ñ R Y t8u, we define the function φ˚ µ : ∆dn2 Ñ R Y t8u by
                                                ´     ¯
                                     φ˚ µpβq “ µ φpβq .

For any function µ : ∆dn2 Ñ R Y t8u, we define the function ψ˚ µ : ∆dn Ñ R Y t8u by
                                            !                )
                              ψ˚ µpαq “ min µpβq | ψpβq “ α .
Recall that the operations of splitting [KMT07, Section 4] and aggregation [KMT07, Section 5]
preserve M-convexity of discrete functions. Therefore, φ˚ and ψ˚ preserve M-convexity. Now,
given ν, set
                                       νk “ ψ˚ pℓk ` φ˚ νq,
                                                                       2
where ℓk is the restriction of the linear function on Rn defined by
                                                  #
                                                    0 if i “ j,
                                      ℓk peij q “
                                                    k if i ‰ j.
The existence theorem for nonnegative matrices with given row and column sums shows that
the restriction of ψ to any fiber of φ is surjective [Bru06, Corollary 1.4.2]. Thus, the assumption
     14In the language of [KMT07], the polarization of ν is obtained from ν by splitting of variables and restricting to “m‰,
                                                                                                                         d
and the projection of µ is obtained from µ by aggregation of variables.
                                          LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                     41


that ν is not identically 8 implies that νk ă 8 for every k. It is straightforward to check that the
sequence νk has the other required properties for large enough k.                                 □

Proof of Theorem 3.20, (ii) ñ (i). Let ft be a polynomial in Ldn pKq whose tropicalization is ν. We
show the M-convexity of ν by checking the local exchange property: For any α, β P dompνq with
|α ´ β|1 “ 4, there are i and j satisfying

              αi ą βi , αj ă βj and νpαq ` νpβq ě νpα ´ ei ` ej q ` νpβ ´ ej ` ei q.

Since |α ´ β|1 “ 4, we can find γ in ∆d´2
                                      n   and indices p, q, r, s in rns such that such that

                 α “ γ ` ep ` eq and β “ γ ` er ` es and tp, qu X tr, su “ H.

Since B γ ft is stable, the tropicalization of B γ ft is M-convex by [Brä10, Theorem 4]. The conclu-
sion follows from the local exchange property for the tropicalization of B γ ft .                  □

Proof of Theorem 3.14. We prove (1) ñ (3). We first show the implication in the special case
                                                     „ ȷ
                                                      n
                                        dompνq “         .
                                                      d
Since dompνq is M-convex, it is enough to prove that B α gqν is has exactly one positive eigenvalue
                  and all 0 ă q ď 1. Since Tn “ Drp2, nq by [MS15, Theorem 4.3.5] and [MS15,
           “ n ‰
for all α P d´2
Definition 4.4.1], the desired statement follows from Lemma 3.21. This proves the first special
case. Now consider the second special case

                                              dompνq “ ∆dn .
                                                                                             “nd‰
By Lemma 3.26, the polarization ΠÒ ν is an M-convex function with effective domain             d , and
hence we may apply the known implication (1) ñ (3) for ΠÒ ν. Therefore,
                                  1 ΠÒ ν
                   ΠÒδ pgqν q “     g    is a Lorentzian polynomial for 0 ă q ď 1,
                                  dd q
where δ “ pd, . . . , dq. Thus, by Proposition 3.1, the polynomial gqν is Lorentzian for all 0 ă q ď 1,
and the second special case is proved. Next consider the third special case

                          dompνq is an arbitrary M-convex set and q “ 1.

By Lemma 3.26, the effective domain of ΠÒ ν is an M-convex set. Therefore, by Theorem 3.10,
                                    1 ΠÒ ν
                           ΠÒδ pg1ν q “g    is a Lorentzian polynomial.
                                    dd 1
Thus, by Proposition 3.1, the polynomial g1ν is Lorentzian, and the the third special case is
proved. In the remaining case when q ă 1 and the effective domain of ν is arbitrary, we ex-
press ν as the limit of M-convex functions νk with effective domain ∆dn using Lemma 3.27. Since
q ă 1, we have
                                              gqν “ lim gqνk .
                                                    kÑ8
Thus the conclusion follows from the second special case applied to each gqνk .
42                                   PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


     We prove (1) ñ (2). Introduce a positive real number p, and consider the M-convex function
ν                                                                         ν{p
p . Applying the known implication (1) ñ (3), we see that the polynomial gq   is Lorentzian for
all 0 ă q ď 1. Therefore, by Proposition 3.25,
                                                              ˆ ˙p νpαq
                                                ÿ              δ  q
                              Rp pgqν{p q “                 p
                                                         pα!q           wα
                                                               α    α!
                                              αPdompνq

is Lorentzian for all 0 ă p ď 1. Taking the limit p to zero, we have (2).
   We prove (2) ñ (1) and (3) ñ (1). By the quantifier elimination for the theory of real closed
fields, the polynomial ftν with coefficients in K is Lorentzian if (2) holds. Similarly, the polyno-
mial gtν is Lorentzian if (3) holds. Since

                                      ν “ troppftν q “ troppgtν q,

the conclusion follows from (ii) ñ (i) of Theorem 3.20.                                             □

Proof of Theorem 3.20, (i) ñ (ii). By Theorem 3.14, fqν is Lorentzian for all sufficiently small posi-
tive real numbers q. Therefore, by the quantifier elimination for the theory of real closed fields,
the polynomial ftν is Lorentzian over K. Clearly, the tropicalization of ftν is ν.                  □

Corollary 3.28. Tropicalizations of Lorentzian polynomials over K are M-convex, and all M-
convex functions are limits of tropicalizations of Lorentzian polynomials over K.

Proof. By Theorem 3.20, it is enough to show that any M-convex function ν : ∆dn Ñ R Y t8u is
a limit of M-convex functions νk : ∆dn Ñ Q Y t8u. By Lemma 3.27, we may suppose that

                                              dompνq “ ∆dn .

In this case, by Lemma 3.26, the polarization ΠÒ ν is M-convex function satisfying
                                                      „ ȷ
                                           ` Ò ˘       nd
                                      dom Π ν “           .
                                                        d
In other words, ´ΠÒ ν is a valuated matroid whose underlying matroid is uniform of rank d on
nd elements. Since the Dressian of the matroid is a rational polyhedral fan [MS15, Section 4.4],
there are M-convex functions µk : ∆dnd Ñ Q Y t8u satisfying

                                              ΠÒ ν “ lim µk .
                                                     kÑ8

By Lemma 3.26, ν “ ΠÓ ΠÒ ν is the limit of M-convex functions ΠÓ µk : ∆dn Ñ Q Y t8u.                □


                                4. E XAMPLES AND APPLICATIONS

4.1. Convex bodies and Lorentzian polynomials. For any collection of convex bodies K “
pK1 , . . . , Kn q in Rd , consider the function

                      volK : Rně0 ÝÑ R,          w ÞÝÑ volpw1 K1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` wn Kn q,
                                            LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                        43


where w1 K1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` wn Kn is the Minkowski sum and vol is the Euclidean volume. Minkowski
noticed that the function volK is a degree d homogeneous polynomial in w “ pw1 , . . . , wn q with
nonnegative coefficients. We may write
                             ÿ                                               ÿ d!
              volK pwq “               V pKi1 , . . . , Kid qwi1 ¨ ¨ ¨ wid “       Vα pKqwα ,
                         1ďi ,...,i ďn                                        d
                                                                                α!
                                1     d                                          αP∆n

where Vα pKq is, by definition, the mixed volume
                                                                                  1 α
                        Vα pKq “ V pK1  , . . . , K1 , . . . , Kn  ,...,K q –        B volK .
                                    looooomooooon              looooomooooon      d!
                                             α1                    αn
                                                    d
For any convex bodies C0 , C1 , . . . , Cd in R , the mixed volume V pC1 , C2 , . . . , Cd q is symmetric
in its arguments and satisfies the relation
                V pC0 ` C1 , C2 , . . . , Cd q “ V pC0 , C2 , . . . , Cd q ` V pC1 , C2 , . . . , Cd q.
We refer to [Sch14] for background on mixed volumes.

Theorem 4.1. The volume polynomial volK is a Lorentzian polynomial for any K “ pK1 , . . . , Kn q.

   When combined with Theorem 2.25, Theorem 4.1 implies the following statement.

Corollary 4.2. The support of volK is an M-convex for any K “ pK1 , . . . , Kn q.

   In other words, the set of all α P ∆dn satisfying the non-vanishing condition
                                    V pK1 , . . . , K1 , . . . , Kn , . .
                                       looooomooooon                      .,K q ‰ 0
                                                                 looooomooooon
                                             α1                    αn

is M-convex for any convex bodies K1 , . . . , Kn in Rd .

Remark 4.3. The mixed volume V pC1 , . . . , Cd q is positive precisely when there are line segments
ℓi Ď Ci with linearly independent directions [Sch14, Theorem 5.1.8]. Thus, when K consists of n
line segments in Rd , Corollary 4.2 states the familiar fact that, for any configuration of n vectors
A Ď Rd , the collection of linearly independent d-subsets of A is the set of bases of a matroid.
   The same reasoning shows that, in fact, the basis generating polynomial of a matroid on rns is
the volume polynomial of n convex bodies precisely when the matroid is regular. In particular,
not every Lorentzian polynomial is a volume polynomial of convex bodies. For example, the
elementary symmetric polynomial
                            w1 w2 ` w1 w3 ` w1 w4 ` w2 w3 ` w2 w4 ` w3 w4
is not the volume polynomial of four convex bodies in the plane. By the compactness theorem
of Shephard for the affine equivalence classes of n convex bodies [She60, Theorem 1], the image
of the set of volume polynomials of convex bodies in PLdn is compact. Thus, the displayed
elementary symmetric polynomial is not even the limit of volume polynomials of convex bodies.
   On the other hand, a collection J Ď nd is the support of a volume polynomial of n convex
                                          “ ‰

bodies in Rd if and only if J is the set of basis of a rank d matroid on rns that is representable
44                                              PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


over R. For example, there are no seven convex bodies in R3 whose volume polynomial has the
support given by the set of bases of the Fano matroid.

Proof of Theorem 4.1. By continuity of the volume functional [Sch14, Theorem 1.8.20], we may
suppose that every convex body in K is d-dimensional. In this case, every coefficient of volK
is positive. Thus, by Theorem 2.25, it is enough to show that B α volH is Lorentzian for every
α P ∆d´2n . For this we use a special case of the Brunn-Minkowski theorem [Sch14, Theorem
7.4.5]: For any convex bodies C3 , . . . , Cd in Rd , the function
                                    ˜                                           ¸1{2
                                         ÿn          n
                                                     ÿ
                          w ÞÝÑ V            wi Ki ,    wi Ki , C3 , . . . , Cd
                                                   i“1             i“1

is concave on Rną0 . In particular, the function
                                               ˜                                                                               ¸1{2
            ´ 2!                  ¯1{2             n
                                                   ÿ               n
                                                                   ÿ
                    α
                   B volK pwq            “V              wi Ki ,         wi Ki , K 1 , . . . , K1 , . . . , K n , . . . , Kn
              d!                                   i“1             i“1
                                                                                 looooomooooon              looooomooooon
                                                                                        α1                       αn

is concave on Rną0 for every α P ∆d´2
                                  n . The conclusion follows from Proposition 2.33.                                                   □

     The Alexandrov–Fenchel inequality [Sch14, Section 7.3] states that
               V pC1 , C2 , C3 , . . . , Cd q2 ě V pC1 , C1 , C3 , . . . , Cd qV pC2 , C2 , C3 , . . . , Cd q.
We show that an analog holds for any Lorentzian polynomial.

Proposition 4.4. If f “ αP∆dn cα!α wα is a Lorentzian polynomial, then
                       ř

                          c2α ě cα`ei ´ej cα´ei `ej for any i, j P rns and any α P ∆dn .

Proof. Consider the Lorentzian polynomial B α´ei ´ej f . Substituting wk by zero for all k other
than i and j, we get the bivariate quadratic polynomial
                            1                         1
                              cα`ei ´ej wi2 ` cα wi w` cα´ei `ej wj2 .
                            2                         2
The displayed polynomial is Lorentzian by Theorem 2.10, and hence c2α ě cα`ei ´ej cα´ei `ej . □

   We may reformulate Proposition 4.4 as follows. Let f be a homogeneous polynomial of de-
gree d in n variables. The complete homogeneous form of f is the multi-linear function Ff : pRn qd Ñ
R defined by
                                                1 B         B
                        Ff pv1 , . . . , vd q “        ¨¨¨     f px1 v1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` xd vd q.
                                                d! Bx1     Bxd
Note that the complete homogeneous form of f is symmetric in its arguments. By Euler’s for-
mula for homogeneous functions, we have
                                                   Ff pw, w, ¨ ¨ ¨ , wq “ f pwq.

Proposition 4.5. If f is Lorentzian, then, for any v1 P Rn and v2 , . . . , vd P Rně0 ,
                    Ff pv1 , v2 , v3 , . . . , vd q2 ě Ff pv1 , v1 , v3 , . . . , vd qFf pv2 , v2 , v3 , . . . , vd q.
                                            LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                     45


Proof. For every k “ 1, . . . , d, we write vk “ pvk1 , vk2 , . . . , vkn q, and set
                                              B         B                 B
                                 Dk “ vk1        ` vk2     ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` vkn     .
                                             Bw1       Bw2               Bwn
By Corollary 2.11, the quadratic polynomial D3 ¨ ¨ ¨ Dd f is Lorentzian. We may suppose that the
Hessian H of the quadratic polynomial is not identically zero and v2T Hv2 ą 0. Note that
                 viT Hvj “ Di Dj D3 ¨ ¨ ¨ Dd f “ d!Ff pvi , vj , v3 , . . . , vd q for any i and j.
Since H has exactly one positive eigenvalue, the conclusion follows from Cauchy’s interlacing
theorem.                                                                                    □

4.2. Projective varieties and Lorentzian polynomials. Let Y be a d-dimensional irreducible
projective variety over an algebraically closed field F. If D1 , . . . , Dd are Cartier divisors on Y ,
the intersection product pD1 ¨ . . . ¨ Dd q is an integer defined by the following properties:

– the product pD1 ¨ . . . ¨ Dd q is symmetric and multilinear as a function of its arguments,
– the product pD1 ¨ . . . ¨ Dd q depends only on the linear equivalence classes of the Di , and
– if D1 , . . . , Dn are effective divisors meeting transversely at smooth points of Y , then
                                      pD1 ¨ . . . ¨ Dd q “ #D1 X . . . X Dd .

Given an irreducible subvariety X Ď Y of dimension k, the intersection product
                                                 pD1 ¨ . . . ¨ Dk ¨ Xq
is then defined by replacing each divisor Di with a linearly equivalent Cartier divisor whose
support does not contain X and intersecting the restrictions of Di in X. The definition of the in-
tersection product linearly extends to Q-linear combination of Cartier divisors, called Q-divisors
[Laz04, Section 1.3]. If D is a Q-divisor on Y , we write pDqd for the self-intersection pD ¨ . . . ¨ Dq.
For a gentle introduction to Cartier divisors and their intersection products, we refer to [Laz04,
Section 1.1]. See [Ful98] for a comprehensive study.
     Let H “ pH1 , . . . , Hn q be a collection of Q-divisors on Y . We define the volume polynomial of H
by
                                                                         ÿ d!
                        volH pwq “ pw1 H1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` wn Hn qd “                 Vα pHqwα ,
                                                                          d
                                                                            α!
                                                                         αP∆n

where Vα pHq is the intersection product
                                                                                   1 α
                         Vα pHq “ pH1  ¨ . . . ¨ H1 ¨ . . . ¨ Hn   ¨ ... ¨ H q “      B volH .
                                   looooomooooon              loooooomoooooon      d!
                                            α1                    αn

A Q-divisor D on Y is said to be nef if pD ¨ Cq ě 0 for every irreducible curve C in Y [Laz04,
Section 1.4].

Theorem 4.6. If H1 , . . . , Hn are nef divisors on Y , then volH pwq is a Lorentzian polynomial.

     When combined with Theorem 2.25, Theorem 4.6 implies the statement.
46                                    PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


Corollary 4.7. If H1 , . . . , Hn are nef divisors on Y , then the support of volH pwq is M-convex.

     In other words, the set of all α P ∆dn satisfying the non-vanishing condition
                                 pH 1 ¨ . . . ¨ H1 ¨ . . . ¨ H
                                  looooomooooon                n ¨ . . . ¨ Hn q ‰ 0
                                                             loooooomoooooon
                                        α1                       αn

is M-convex for any d-dimensional projective variety Y and any nef divisors H1 , . . . , Hn on Y .
Corollary 4.7 implies a result of Castillo et al. [CRLMZ, Proposition 5.4], which says that the
support of the multidegree of any irreducible mutiprojective variety is a discrete polymatroid.

Remark 4.8. Let A “ tv1 , . . . , vn u be a collection of n vectors in Fd . In [HW17, Section 4], one can
find a d-dimensional projective variety YA and nef divisors H1 , . . . , Hn on YA such that
                                                        ÿ
                                           volH pwq “          cα w α ,
                                                          n
                                                       αPr d s

where cα “ 1 if α corresponds to a linearly independent subset of A and cα “ 0 if otherwise.
Thus, in this case, Corollary 4.7 states the familiar fact that the collection of linearly independent
d-subsets of A Ď Fd is the set of bases of a matroid.

Proof of Theorem 4.6. By Kleiman’s theorem [Laz04, Section 1.4], every nef divisor is a limit of
ample divisors, and we may suppose that every divisor in H is very ample. In this case, ev-
ery coefficient of volH is positive. Thus, by Theorem 2.25, it is enough to show that B α volH is
Lorentzian for every α P ∆d´2
                            n . Note that
                              ˜                                                                  ¸
                                  n          n
              2! α               ÿ           ÿ
                 B volH pwq “        wi Hi ¨   wi Hi ¨ looooomooooon
                                                       H1 ¨ . . . ¨ H1 ¨ . . . ¨ loooooomoooooon
                                                                                 Hn ¨ . . . ¨ Hn .
              d!                  i“1           i“1                   α1              αn

By Bertini’s theorem [Laz04, Section 3.3], there is an irreducible surface S Ď Y such that
                                             ˜                           ¸
                                                n            n
                          2! α                 ÿ            ÿ
                             B volH pwq “          w i Hi ¨     wi Hi ¨ S .
                          d!                   i“1          i“1

If S is smooth, then the Hodge index theorem [Har77, Theorem V.1.9] shows that the displayed
quadratic form has exactly one positive eigenvalue. In general, the Hodge index theorem ap-
plied to any resolution of singularities of S implies the one positive eigenvalue condition, by
the projection formula [Ful98, Example 2.4.3].                                                □

   How large is the set of volume polynomials of projective varieties within the set of Lorentzian
polynomials? We formulate various precise versions of this question. Let Vnd pFq be the set of
volume polynomials of n nef divisors on a d-dimensional projective variety over F, and let
Vnd “ F Vnd pFq, where the union is over all algebraically closed fields.
     Ť

Question 4.9. Fix any algebraically closed field F.

(1) Is there a polynomial in Ldn that is not in the closure of Vnd ?
(2) Is there a polynomial in Ldn that is not in the closure of Vnd pFq?
                                               LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                                     47


(3) Is there a polynomial in Ldn X Qrws that is not in Vnd ?
(4) Is there a polynomial in Ldn X Qrws that is not in Vnd pFq?

  Shephard’s construction in [She60, Section 3] shows that every polynomial in Ld2 X Qrws is the
volume polynomial of a pair of d-dimensional convex polytopes with rational vertices. Thus,
by [Ful93, Section 5.4], we have
                                Ld2 X Qrws “ V2d “ V2d pFq for any d and any F.
A similar reasoning based on the construction of [Hei38, Section I] shows that
                                       L23 X Qrws “ V32 “ V32 pFq for any F.
When n ě 4, not every Lorentzian polynomial is the limit of a sequence of volume polynomials
of rational convex polytopes (Remark 4.3), and we do not know how to answer any of the above
questions.15

4.3. Potts model partition functions and Lorentzian polynomials. The q-state Potts model, or
the random-cluster model, of a graph is a much studied class of measures introduced by Fortuin
and Kasteleyn [FK72]. We refer to [Gri06] for a comprehensive introduction to random-cluster
models.
  Let M be a matroid on rns, and let rkM be the rank function of M. For a nonnegative integer k
and a positive real parameter q, consider the degree k homogeneous polynomial in n variables
                                     ÿ
                        Zkq,M pwq “       q ´rkM pAq wA , w “ pw1 , . . . , wn q.
                                    APrn
                                       ks


We define the homogeneous multivariate Tutte polynomial of M by
                                                                    n
                                                                    ÿ
                                   Zq,M pw0 , w1 , . . . , wn q “         Zkq,M pwq w0n´k ,
                                                                    k“0

which is a homogeneous polynomial of degree n in n ` 1 variables. When M is the cycle matroid
of a graph G, the polynomial obtained from Zq,M by setting w0 “ 1 is the partition function of
the q-state Potts model associated to G [Sok05].
   15After the completion of this paper, we noticed that the closure of V3 pFq is strictly smaller than L3 for any F. This
                                                                              3                            3
answers Question 4.9. Specifically, the Lorentzian cubic f “ 14x3 ` 6x2 y ` 24x2 z ` 12xyz ` 6xz 2 ` 3yz 2 is not in
the closure of V33 pFq. That f is not in the closure of V33 pFq can be shown using the reverse Khovanskii-Teissier inequality
[LX17, Theorem 5.7]: For any nef divisors H1 , H2 , H3 on a d-dimensional projective variety and any k ď d, we have
                                   ´d¯
                                        pHk2 ¨ Hd´k
                                                 1  q pHk1 ¨ Hd´k
                                                               3   q ě pHd1 q pHk2 ¨ Hd´k
                                                                                      3   q.
                                     k
The complex analytic proof of the inequality in [LX17] relies on the Calabi-Yau theorem [Yau78]. The algebraic proof
of the inequality in [JL] using Okounkov bodies works over any algebraically closed field. The theory of toric varieties
shows that the volume polynomial of any set of convex bodies is the limit of a sequence of volume polynomials of nef
divisors on projective varieties [Ful93, Section 5.4]. Thus, the Lorentzian cubic f provides a counterexample to Gurvits’
conjecture that a strongly log-concave homogeneous polynomial in three variables with nonnegative coefficients is the
volume polynomial of three convex bodies [Gur09, Conjecture 4.1].
48                                    PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


   Since the rank function of a matroid is M6 -concave, the normalized rank generating function
of M is Lorentzian when the parameter q satisfies 0 ă q ď 1, see Example 3.15. In this subsection,
we prove the following refinement.

Theorem 4.10. For any matroid M and 0 ă q ď 1, the polynomial Zq,M is Lorentzian.

     We prepare the proof with two simple lemmas.

Lemma 4.11. The support of Zq,M is M-convex for all 0 ă q ď 1.

Proof. Writing Z6q,M for the polynomial obtained from Zq,M by setting w0 “ 1, we have
                                               ˘ ␣ (n
                                    supp Z6q,M “ 0, 1 .
                                          `

It is straightforward to verify the augmentation property in Lemma 2.21 for t0, 1un .            □

  For a nonnegative integer k and a subset S Ď rns, we define a degree k homogeneous poly-
nomial ekS pwq by the equation
                                    ÿn           ÿ
                                       ekS pwq “    wA .
                                       k“0       AĎS
                 k
In other words, eS pwq is the k-th elementary symmetric polynomial in the variables twi uiPS .

Lemma 4.12. If S1 \ . . . \ Sm is a partition of rns into m nonempty parts, then
                        1 1
                         e pwq2 ď e1S1 pwq2 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` e1Sm pwq2 for all w P Rn .
                        n rns
Proof. Since m ď n, it is enough to prove the statement when m “ n. In this case, we have
                                pw1 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` wn q2 ď npw12 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` wn2 q,
by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality for the vectors p1, . . . , 1q and pw1 , . . . , wn q in Rn .   □

Proof of Theorem 4.10. Let α be an element of ∆n´2
                                               n`1 . By Theorem 2.25 and Lemma 4.11, the proof
reduces to the statement that the quadratic form B α Zq,M is stable. We prove the statement by
induction on n. The assertion is clear when n “ 1, so suppose n ě 2. When i ‰ 0, we have
                                        Bi Zq,M “ q ´rkM piq Zq,M{i ,
where M{i is the contraction of M by i [Oxl11, Chapter 3]. Thus, it is enough to prove that the
following quadratic form is stable:
                           n! 2
                             w ` pn ´ 1q! Z1q,M pwqw0 ` pn ´ 2q! Z2q,M pwq.
                           2 0
Recall that a homogeneous polynomial f with nonnegative coefficients in n ` 1 variables is
stable if and only if the univariate polynomial f pxu ´ vq has only real zeros for all v P Rn`1 for
some u P Rn`1ě0 satisfying f puq ą 0. Therefore, it suffices to show that the discriminant of the
displayed quadratic form with respect to w0 is nonnegative:
                                             n
                            Z1q,M pwq2 ě 2      Z2 pwq for all w P Rn .
                                           n ´ 1 q,M
                                      LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                      49


We prove the inequality after making the change of variables
                                   #
                                      wi if i is a loop in M,
                            wi ÞÝÑ
                                      qwi if i is not a loop in M.

Write L Ď rns for the set of loops and P1 , . . . , Pℓ Ď rnszL for the parallel classes in M [Oxl11,
Section 1.1]. The above change of variables gives
                                                                   `                           ˘
          Z1q,M pwq “ e1rns pwq and Z2q,M pwq “ e2rns pwq ´ p1 ´ qq e2P1 pwq ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` e2Pℓ pwq .

When q “ 1, the desired inequality directly follows from the case m “ n of Lemma 4.12. There-
fore, when proving the desired inequality for an arbitrary 0 ă q ď 1, we may assume that

                                     e2P1 pwq ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` e2Pℓ pwq ă 0.

Therefore, exploiting the monotonicity of Z2q,M in q, the desired inequality reduces to
                                        ´                                       ¯
                  pn ´ 1qe1rns pwq2 ´ 2n e2rns pwq ´ e2P1 pwq ´ ¨ ¨ ¨ ´ e2Pℓ pwq ě 0.

Note that the left-hand side of the above inequality simplifies to
                          ´                               ÿ ¯
                        n e1P1 pwq2 ` ¨ ¨ ¨ ` e1Pℓ pwq2 `  wi2 ´ e1rns pwq2 .
                                                           iPL

The conclusion now follows from Lemma 4.12.                                                       □

   Mason [Mas72] offered the following three conjectures of increasing strength. Several au-
thors studied correlations in matroid theory partly in pursuit of these conjectures [SW75, Wag08,
BBL09, KN10, KN11].

Conjecture 4.13. For any matroid M on rns and any positive integer k,

(1) Ik pMq2 ě Ik´1 pMqIk`1 pMq,
(2) Ik pMq2 ě k`1
               k Ik´1 pMqIk`1 pMq,

(3) Ik pMq2 ě k`1
               k
                  n´k`1
                   n´k Ik´1 pMqIk`1 pMq,

where Ik pMq is the number of k-element independent sets of M.

  Conjecture 4.13 (1) was proved in [AHK18], and Conjecture 4.13 (2) was proved in [HSW].
Note that Conjecture 4.13 (3) may be written

                                    Ik pMq2  Ik`1 pMq Ik´1 pMq
                                     ` n˘ 2 ě ` n ˘    ` n ˘ ,
                                      k            k`1        k´1

and the equality holds when all pk ` 1q-subsets of rns are independent in M. Conjecture 4.13
(3) is known to hold when n is at most 11 or k is at most 5 [KN11]. See [Sey75, Dow80, Mah85,
Zha85, HK12, HS89, Len13] for other partial results.
50                                          PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


Theorem 4.14. For any matroid M on rns and any positive integer k,
                                           Ik pMq2  Ik`1 pMq Ik´1 pMq
                                            ` n˘ 2 ě ` n ˘    ` n ˘ ,
                                              k             k`1         k´1

where Ik pMq is the number of k-element independent sets of M.

   In [BH], direct proofs of Theorems 4.10 and 4.14 were given.16 Here we deduce Theorem 4.14
from the Lorentzian property of
                                                ÿ     n´|A|
                   fM pw0 , w1 , . . . , wn q “   wA w0     , w “ pw1 , . . . , wn q,
                                                   APIpMq

where IpMq is the collection of independent sets of M.

Proof of Theorem 4.14. The polynomial fM is Lorentzian by Theorem 4.10 and the identity

                              fM pw0 , w1 , . . . , wn q “ lim Zq,M pw0 , qw1 , . . . , qwn q.
                                                          qÑ0

Therefore, by Theorem 2.10, the bivariate polynomial obtained from fM by setting w1 “ ¨ ¨ ¨ “ wn
is Lorentzian. The conclusion follows from the fact that a bivariate homogeneous polynomial
with nonnegative coefficients is Lorentzian if and only if the sequence of coefficients form an
ultra log-concave sequence with no internal zeros.                                             □

     The Tutte polynomial of a matroid M on rns is the bivariate polynomial
                                    ÿ
                      TM px, yq “      px ´ 1qrkM prnsq´rkM pAq py ´ 1q|A|´rkM pAq .
                                         AĎrns

Theorem 4.10 reveals several nontrivial inequalities satisfied by the coefficients of the Tutte poly-
nomial. For example, if we write
                                          n ´ ÿ                               n
                      ´   q        ¯     ÿ                             ¯     ÿ
         wrkM prnsq TM 1 ` , 1 ` w “                q rkM prnsq´rkM pAq wk “     ckq pMqwk ,
                          w              k“0 APrns                           k“0
                                                 k


then the sequence ckq pMq is ultra log-concave whenever 0 ď q ď 1. This and other results in this
subsection are recently extended to flag matroids in [EH20].

4.4. M-matrices and Lorentzian polynomials. We write In for the n ˆ n identity matrix, Jn for
the n ˆ n matrix all of whose entries are 1, and 1n for the n ˆ 1 matrix all of whose entries are
1. Let A “ paij q be an n ˆ n matrix with real entries. The following conditions are equivalent if
aij ď 0 for all i ‰ j [BP94, Chapter 6]:

– The real part of each nonzero eigenvalue of A is positive.
– The real part of each eigenvalue of A is nonnegative.
– All the principal minors of A are nonnegative.

     16An independent proof of 4.14 was given by Anari et al. in [ALOVIII].
                                         LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                  51


– Every real eigenvalue of A is nonnegative.
– The matrix A ` ϵ In is nonsingular for every ϵ ą 0.
– The univariate polynomial detpxIn ` Aq has nonnegative coefficients.

The matrix A is an M-matrix if aij ď 0 for all i ‰ j and if it satisfies any one of the above
conditions. One can find 50 different characterizations of nonsingular M-matrices in [BP94,
Chapter 6]. Among others, we will use the 29-th condition:

– There are positive diagonal matrices D and D1 such that DAD1 has all diagonal entries 1 and
  all row sums positive.

For a discussion of M-matrices in the context of ultrametrics and potentials of finite Markov
chains, see [DMS14].
  We define the multivariate characteristic polynomial of A by the equation
                                                   ´                               ¯
                   pA pw0 , w1 , . . . , wn q “ det w0 In ` diagpw1 , . . . , wn qA .

In [Hol05, Theorem 4], Holtz proved that the coefficients of the characteristic polynomial of an
M-matrix form an ultra log-concave sequence. We will strengthen this result and prove that the
multivariate characteristic polynomial of an M-matrix is Lorentzian.

Theorem 4.15. If A is an M-matrix, then pA is a Lorentzian polynomial.

  Using Example 2.26, we may recover the theorem of Holtz by setting w1 “ ¨ ¨ ¨ “ wn .

Corollary 4.16. If A is an M-matrix, then the support of pA is M-convex.

   Since every M-matrix is a limit of nonsingular M-matrices, it is enough to prove Theorem 4.15
for nonsingular M-matrices.

Lemma 4.17. If A is a nonsingular M-matrix, the support of pA is M-convex.

Proof. It is enough to prove that the support of p6A is M6 -convex, where

                                 p6A pw1 , . . . , wn q “ pA p1, w1 , . . . , wn q.

If A is a nonsingular M-matrix, then all the principal minors of A are positive, and hence

                                            supppp6A q “ t0, 1un .

It is straightforward to verify the augmentation property in Lemma 2.21 for t0, 1un .            □

   We prepare the proof of Theorem 4.15 with a proposition on doubly sub-stochastic matrices.
Recall that an n ˆ n matrix B “ pbij q with nonnegative entries is said to be doubly sub-stochastic
if
                      n
                      ÿ                             ÿn
                         bij ď 1 for every i and       bij ď 1 for every j.
                       j“1                                     i“1
52                                              PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


A partial permutation matrix is a zero-one matrix with at most one nonzero entry in each row
and column. We use Mirsky’s analog of the Birkhoff-von Neumann theorem for doubly sub-
stochastic matrices [HJ94, Theorem 3.2.6]: The set of n ˆ n doubly sub-stochastic matrix is equal
to the convex hull of the n ˆ n partial permutation matrices.

Lemma 4.18. For n ě 2, define n ˆ n matrices Mn and Nn by
                  ¨                       ˛         ¨                                                                            ˛
                     2              1     0     ¨¨¨     0        1               2        1        0     ¨¨¨           0     0
                   ˚ 1              2     1     ¨¨¨     0        0 ‹           ˚ 1        2        1     ¨¨¨           0     0 ‹
                   ˚                                                ‹          ˚                                                ‹
                   ˚ 0              1     2             0        0 ‹           ˚ 0        1        2                   0     0 ‹
                   ˚                                                ‹          ˚                                                ‹
                                                ¨¨¨                                                      ¨¨¨
              Mn “ ˚
                   ˚ ..             ..    ..    ..      ..          ‹,
                                                                 .. ‹     Nn “ ˚
                                                                               ˚ ..       ..       ..    ..            ..       ‹.
                                                                                                                             .. ‹
                   ˚ .               .     .       .     .        . ‹          ˚ .         .        .       .           .     . ‹
                   ˚                                                ‹          ˚                                                ‹
                   ˝ 0              0     0     ¨¨¨     2        1 ‚           ˝ 0        0        0     ¨¨¨           2     1 ‚
                     1              0     0     ¨¨¨     1        2               0        0        0     ¨¨¨           1     2

Then the matrices Mn ´ n2 Jn and Nn ´ n2 Jn are positive semidefinite. Equivalently,
                               ˜            ¸              ˜           ¸
                                  Mn 1 n                     Nn 1 n
                      Mn`1 –             n
                                               , Nn`1 –
                                  1Tn    2                   1Tn n2

are positive semidefinite.

Proof. We define symmetric matrices Ln`1 and Kn`1 by
               ¨                       1
                                          ˛          ¨                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                          ˛
                 1       1     0         ¨¨¨     0     0         2
                                                                                   1           1        0       ¨¨¨         0    0    2
               ˚ 1       2     1         ¨¨¨     0     0         1 ‹             ˚ 1           2        1       ¨¨¨         0    0    1 ‹
               ˚                                                    ‹            ˚                                                       ‹
               ˚ 0       1     2         ¨¨¨     0     0         1 ‹
                                                                    ‹            ˚ 0           1        2       ¨¨¨         0    0    1 ‹
                                                                                                                                         ‹
               ˚                                                                 ˚
               ˚ .       ..    ..        ..      ..    ..        .. ‹            ˚ .           ..       ..      ..          ..   ..   .. ‹
               ˚ ..
        Ln`1 “ ˚                            .                     . ‹,           ˚ ..
                                                                          Kn`1 “ ˚                                 .                   . ‹.
                                                                    ‹                                                                    ‹
                          .     .                 .     .                                       .        .                   .    .
               ˚                                                    ‹            ˚                                                       ‹
               ˚ 0       0     0         ¨¨¨     2     1         1 ‹             ˚ 0           0        0       ¨¨¨         2    1    1 ‹
               ˚                                                 1
                                                                     ‹           ˚                                                       ‹
               ˝ 0       0     0         ¨¨¨     1     1         2
                                                                     ‚           ˝ 0           0        0       ¨¨¨         1    2    1 ‚
                    1                                  1         n                    1                                               n
                    2
                         1     1         ¨¨¨     1     2         2                    2
                                                                                               1        1       ¨¨¨         1    1    2

As before, the subscript indicates the size of the matrix. We show, by induction on n, that the
matrices Ln`1 and Kn`1 are positive semidefinite. It is straightforward to check that L3 and
K3 are positive semidefinite. Perform the symmetric row and column elimination of Ln`1 and
Kn`1 based on their 1 ˆ 1 entries, and notice that
            ¨                                ˛             ¨                             ˛
               1   0    0     ¨¨¨         0     0           0                         1        0        0       ¨¨¨         0    0        0
            ˚ 0                                             1                                                                             1
            ˚      1    1     ¨¨¨         0     0           2
                                                                     ‹
                                                                     ‹
                                                                                 ˚ 0
                                                                                 ˚             1        1       ¨¨¨         0    0        2
                                                                                                                                               ‹
                                                                                                                                               ‹
            ˚ 0    1    2     ¨¨¨         0     0           1
                                                                     ‹           ˚ 0           1        2       ¨¨¨         0    0      1
                                                                                                                                               ‹
            ˚                                                        ‹           ˚                                                             ‹
            ˚ .    ..   ..    ..          ..    ..          ..       ‹           ˚ .           ..       ..      ..          ..   ..     ..     ‹
            ˚ ..
     Ln`1 » ˚                                                                    ˚ ..
                                 .
                                                                     ‹,   Kn`1 » ˚                                 .
                                                                                                                                               ‹,
                    .    .                 .     .           .       ‹                          .        .                   .    .      .     ‹
            ˚                                                        ‹           ˚                                                             ‹
            ˚ 0    0    0     ¨¨¨         2     1           1        ‹           ˚ 0           0        0       ¨¨¨         2    1      1      ‹
            ˚                                               1
                                                                     ‹           ˚                                                             ‹
            ˝ 0    0    0     ¨¨¨         1     1           2
                                                                     ‚           ˝ 0           0        0       ¨¨¨         1    1      1      ‚
                   1                            1      n
               0   2
                        1     ¨¨¨         1     2      2
                                                         ´ 14                         0        1
                                                                                               2
                                                                                                        1       ¨¨¨         1    1    n
                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                        ´  1
                                                                                                                                           4

where the symbol » stands for the congruence relation for symmetric matrices. Since Ln is
positive semidefinite, Ln`1 is congruent to the sum of positive semidefinite matrices, and hence
                                                    LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                                           53


Ln`1 is positive semidefinite. Similarly, since Kn is positive semidefinite, Kn`1 is congruent to
the sum of positive semidefinite matrices, and hence Kn`1 is positive semidefinite.
   We now prove that the symmetric matrices Mn`1 and Nn`1 are positive semidefinite. Per-
form the symmetric row and column elimination of Mn`1 and Nn`1 based on their 1 ˆ 1 entries,
and notice that
            ¨                             ˛            ¨                             ˛
                2     0        0     ¨¨¨      0        0       0                       2      0    0    ¨¨¨     0    0    0
                      3                                                                       3
          ˚ 0
          ˚           2
                               1     ¨¨¨      0     ´ 12       1
                                                               2
                                                                    ‹
                                                                    ‹
                                                                                ˚ 0
                                                                                ˚             2
                                                                                                   1    ¨¨¨     0    0     1
                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                ‹
                                                                                                                                ‹
          ˚ 0         1        2     ¨¨¨      0        0       1
                                                                    ‹           ˚ 0           1    2    ¨¨¨     0    0    1
                                                                                                                                ‹
          ˚                                                         ‹           ˚                                               ‹
          ˚ .          ..       ..    ..       ..       ..     ..   ‹           ˚ .           ..   ..   ..      ..   ..   ..    ‹
          ˚ ..                                                                  ˚ ..
   Mn`1 » ˚                              .
                                                                    ‹,   Nn`1 » ˚                          .
                                                                                                                                ‹.
                        .        .              .        .      .   ‹                          .    .            .    .    .    ‹
          ˚                                                         ‹           ˚                                               ‹
          ˚ 0         0        0     ¨¨¨      2        1       1    ‹           ˚ 0           0    0    ¨¨¨     2    1    1     ‹
          ˚                                            3       1
                                                                    ‹           ˚                                               ‹
          ˝ 0       ´ 12       0     ¨¨¨      1        2       2
                                                                    ‚           ˝ 0           0    0    ¨¨¨     1    2    1     ‚
                       1                               1      n´1                             1                           n´1
                0      2
                               1     ¨¨¨      1        2       2
                                                                                       0      2
                                                                                                   1    ¨¨¨     1    1     2

Since Ln is positive semidefinite, Mn`1 is congruent to the sum of two positive semidefinite
matrices, and hence Mn`1 is positive semidefinite. Similarly, since Kn is positive semidefinite,
Nn`1 is congruent to the sum of two positive semidefinite matrices, and hence Nn`1 is positive
semidefinite.                                                                                 □

Proposition 4.19. If B is an n ˆ n doubly sub-stochastic matrix, then 2In ` B ` BT ´ n2 Jn is
positive semidefinite.

Proof. Let Cn be the symmetric matrix 2In ` B ` BT , and let Cn`1 be the symmetric matrix
                                            ˜          ¸
                                              C n 1n
                                   Cn`1 –                 .
                                               1Tn n2

It is enough to prove that Cn`1 is positive semidefinite. Since the convex hull of the partial per-
mutation matrices is the set of doubly sub-stochastic matrix, the proof reduces to the case when
B is a partial permutation matrix. We use the following extension of the cycle decomposition
for partial permutations: For any partial permutation matrix B, there is a permutation matrix P
such that PBPT is a block diagonal matrix, where each block diagonal is either zero, identity,
                   ¨                        ˛      ¨                        ˛
                           0     0    0      ¨¨¨     0       1             0   0   0       ¨¨¨     0    0
                    ˚ 1 0 0                  ¨¨¨     0       0 ‹         ˚ 1 0 0           ¨¨¨     0    0 ‹
                    ˚                                           ‹        ˚                                 ‹
                    ˚ 0 1 0                          0       0 ‹         ˚ 0 1 0                   0    0 ‹
                    ˚                                           ‹        ˚                                 ‹
                                             ¨¨¨                                           ¨¨¨
                                                                ‹ or                                       ‹.
                    ˚ . . .                          ..      .. ‹        ˚ . . .                   ..   .. ‹
                    ˚ . . .                  ..                          ˚ . . .           ..
                    ˚ . . .                     .     .       . ‹        ˚ . . .              .     .    . ‹
                    ˚                                           ‹        ˚                                 ‹
                    ˝ 0 0 0                  ¨¨¨     0       0 ‚         ˝ 0 0 0           ¨¨¨     0    0 ‚
                           0     0    0      ¨¨¨     1       0             0   0   0       ¨¨¨     1    0

Using the cyclic decomposition for B, we can express the matrix Cn`1 as a sum, where each
summand is positive semidefinite by Lemma 4.18.                                         □

  The remaining part of the proof of Theorem 4.15 parallels that of Theorem 4.10.
54                                     PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


Proof of Theorem 4.15. Since every M-matrix is a limit of nonsingular M-matrices, we may sup-
pose that A is a nonsingular M-matrix. For k “ 0, 1, . . . , n, we set
                                       ÿ
                            pkA pwq “       Aα wα , w “ pw1 , . . . , wn q,
                                      αPrn
                                         ks


where Aα is the principal minor of A corresponding to α, so that
                                                                n
                                                                ÿ
                                 pA pw0 , w1 , . . . , wn q “         pkA pwqw0n´k .
                                                                k“0

Lemma 4.17 shows that the support of pA is M-convex. Therefore, by Theorem 2.25, it is enough
to prove that Bi ppA q is Lorentzian for i “ 0, 1, . . . , n. We prove this statement by induction on n.
The assertion is clear when n “ 1, so suppose n ě 2.
   When i ‰ 0, write B for the inverse of A and B{i for the matrix obtained from B by deleting
the i-th row and column. We observe that the i-th partial derivative of pA is given by
                                          ´                                ¯
    Bi pA pw0 , w1 , . . . , wn q “ Bi det w0 In ` diagpw1 , . . . , wn qA
                                                 ´                              ¯
                                  “ detpAq Bi det w0 B ` diagpw1 , . . . , wn q
                                               ´                                              ¯
                                  “ detpAq det w0 pB{iq ` diagpw1 , . . . , ŵi , . . . , wn q
                                                       ´                                                     ¯
                                  “ detpAq detpB{iq det w0 In´1 ` diagpw1 , . . . , ŵi , . . . , wn qpB{iq´1 .

By [Mar72, Theorem 3.1], the matrix B{i has positive determinant and its inverse is an M -
matrix, so the induction hypotheis applies to the right-hand side. Thus, to conclude, it is enough
to prove that the following quadratic form is stable:
                               n! 2
                                 w ` pn ´ 1q! p1A pwqw0 ` pn ´ 2q! p2A pwq.
                               2 0
As in the proof of Theorem 4.10 it suffices to show that the discriminant of the displayed qua-
dratic form with respect to w0 is nonnegative:
                                               2n 2
                                 p1A pwq2 ě       p pwq for all w P Rn .
                                              n´1 A
In terms
       ´ of the entries of
                         ¯ A, the displayed inequality is equivalent to the statement that the
matrix aij aji ´ n1 aii ajj    is positive semidefinite. According to the 29-th characterization of
nonsingular M-matrices in [BP94, Chapter 6], there are positive diagonal matrices D and D1
such that DAD1 has all diagonal entries 1 and all row sums positive. Therefore, we may suppose
that A has all diagonal entries 1 and all the row sums of A are positive. Under this assumption,
                               ´          1       ¯           1
                                 aij aji ´ aii ajj “ In ´ B ´ Jn ,
                                          n                   n
where ´B is a symmetric doubly sub-stochastic matrix all of whose diagonal entries are zero.
The conclusion follows from Proposition 4.19.                                             □
                                           LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                     55


4.5. Lorentzian probability measures. There are numerous important examples of negatively
dependent “repelling” random variables in probability theory, combinatorics, stochastic pro-
cesses, and statistical mechanics. See, for example, [Pem00]. A theory of negative dependence
for strongly Rayleigh measures was developed in [BBL09], but the theory is too restrictive for
several applications. Here we introduce a broader class of discrete probability measures using
the Lorentzian property.
  A discrete probability measure µ on t0, 1un is a probability measure on t0, 1un such that all
subsets of t0, 1un are measurable. The partition function of µ is the polynomial
                                             ÿ `        ˘ź
                                  Zµ pwq “        µ tSu      wi .
                                                  SĎrns             iPS

The following notions capture various aspects of negative dependence:

– The measure µ is pairwise negatively correlated (PNC) if for all distinct i and j in rns,

                                        µpEi X Ej q ď µpEi qµpEj q,

  where Ei is the collection of all subsets of rns containing i.
– The measure µ is ultra log-concave (ULC) if for every positive integer k ă n,
                                  ´“ ‰¯2      ´“ ‰¯ ´“ ‰¯
                                µ nk        µ k´1 n
                                                      µ k`1n

                                  ` ˘2 ě ` n ˘          ` n ˘ .
                                       n
                                       k                k´1          k`1

– The measure µ is strongly Rayleigh if for all distinct i and j in rns,

                        Zµ pwq Bi Bj Zµ pwq ď Bi Zµ pwq Bj Zµ pwq for all w P Rn .

Let P be a property of discrete probability measures. We say that µ has property P if, for every
x P Rną0 , the discrete probability measure on t0, 1un with the partition function

                                 Zµ px1 w1 , . . . , xn wn q{Zµ px1 , . . . , xn q

has property P. The new discrete probability measure is said to be obtained from µ by applying
the external field x P Rną0 . For example, the property PNC for µ is equivalent to the 1-Rayleigh
property

         Zµ pwq Bi Bj Zµ pwq ď Bi Zµ pwq Bj Zµ pwq for all distinct i, j in rns and all w P Rną0 .

More generally, for a positive real number c, we say that µ is c-Rayleigh if

        Zµ pwq Bi Bj Zµ pwq ď c Bi Zµ pwq Bj Zµ pwq for all distinct i, j in rns and all w P Rną0 .

Definition 4.20. A discrete probability measure µ on t0, 1un is Lorentzian if the homogenization
of the partition function w0n Zµ pw1 {w0 , . . . , wn {w0 q is a Lorentzian polynomial.

  For example, if A is an M-matrix of size n, the probability measure on t0, 1un given by
             `     ˘ ´                                              ¯
            µ tSu 9 the principal minor of A corresponding to S , S Ď rns,
56                                    PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


is Lorentzian by Theorem 4.15. Results from the previous sections reveal basic features of
Lorentzian measures, some of which may be interpreted as negative dependence properties.

Proposition 4.21. If µ is Lorentzian, then µ is 2-Rayleigh.
                                                          ´      ¯
Proof. Lemma 2.20 and Proposition 2.19 show that Zµ is a 2 1 ´ n1 -Rayleigh polynomial.          □

Proposition 4.22. If µ is Lorentzian, then µ is ULC.

Proof. Since any probability measure obtained from a Lorentzian probability measure by ap-
plying an external field is Lorentzian, it suffices to prove that µ is ULC. By Theorem 2.10, the
bivariate homogeneous polynomial w0n Zµ pw1 {w0 , . . . , w1 {w0 q is Lorentzian. Therefore, by Ex-
ample 2.26, its sequence of coefficients must be ultra log-concave.                              □

Proposition 4.23. The class of Lorentzian measures is preserved under the symmetric exclusion
process.

Proof. The statement is Corollary 3.9 for homogenized partition functions of Lorentzian proba-
bility measures.                                                                            □

Proposition 4.24. If µ is strongly Rayleigh, then µ is Lorentzian.

Proof. A multi-affine polynomial is stable if and only if it is strongly Rayleigh [Brä07, Theorem
5.6], and a polynomial with nonnegative coefficients is stable if and only if its homogeniza-
tion is stable [BBL09, Theorem 4.5]. By Proposition 2.2, homogeneous stable polynomials with
nonnegative coefficients are Lorentzian.                                                         □

     For a matroid M on rns, we define probability measures µM and νM on t0, 1un by

         µM “ the uniform measure on t0, 1un concentrated on the independent sets of M,
         νM “ the uniform measure on t0, 1un concentrated on the bases of M.

Proposition 4.25. For any matroid M on rns, the measures µM and νM are Lorentzian.

Proof. Note that the homogenized partition function fM of µM satisfies

                        fM pw0 , w1 , . . . , wn q “ lim Zq,M pw0 , qw1 , . . . , qwn q.
                                                    qÑ0

Since a limit of Lorentzian polynomials is Lorentzian, µM is Lorentzian by Theorem 4.10. The
partition function of νM is Lorentzian by Theorem 3.10.                                   □

   Let G be an arbitrary finite graph and let i and j be any distinct edges of G. A conjecture of
Kahn [Kah00] and Grimmett–Winkler [GW04] states that, if F is a forest in G chosen uniformly
at random, then

                    PrpF contains i and jq ď PrpF contains iq PrpF contains jq.
                                                LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                                       57


The conjecture is equivalent to the statement that µM is 1-Rayleigh for any graphic matroid M.
Propositions 4.21 and 4.25 show that µM is 2-Rayleigh for any matroid M.


                                                       R EFERENCES
[AHK18] Karim Adiprasito, June Huh, and Eric Katz, Hodge theory for combinatorial geometries. Ann. of Math. (2) 188
      (2018), no. 2, 381–452. 5, 49
[AOVI] Nima Anari, Shayan Oveis Gharan, and Cynthia Vinzant, Log-Concave Polynomials I: Entropy and a Deterministic
       Approximation Algorithm for Counting Bases of Matroids. arXiv:1807.00929. 3, 5, 23, 24, 32
[ALOVII] Nima Anari, Kuikui Liu, Shayan Oveis Gharan, and Cynthia Vinzant, Log-Concave Polynomials II: High-
       dimensional walks and an FPRAS for counting bases of a matroid. arXiv:1811.0181. 5, 39
[ALOVIII] Nima Anari, Kuikui Liu, Shayan Oveis Gharan, and Cynthia Vinzant, Log-Concave Polynomials III: Mason’s
       Ultra-Log-Concavity Conjecture for Independent Sets of Matroids. arXiv:1811.01600. 5, 23, 50
[BR97] Ravindra Bapat and Tirukkannamangai Raghavan, Nonnegative matrices and applications. Encyclopedia of Math-
       ematics and its Applications 64. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997. 37, 39
[BCR84] Christian Berg, Jens Christensen, and Paul Ressel, Harmonic analysis on semigroups. Theory of positive definite and
       related functions. Graduate Texts in Mathematics 100. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1984. 39
[BP94] Abraham Berman, and Robert Plemmons, Nonnegative matrices in the mathematical sciences. Revised reprint of
       the 1979 original. Classics in Applied Mathematics 9. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM),
       Philadelphia, PA, 1994 5, 50, 51, 54
[BB08] Julius Borcea and Petter Brändén, Applications of stable polynomials to mixed determinants: Johnson’s conjectures,
        unimodality, and symmetrized Fischer products, Duke Math. J. 143 (2008), 205–223. 8
[BB09] Julius Borcea and Petter Brändén, The Lee–Yang and Pólya–Schur programs. I. Linear operators preserving stability.
        Invent. Math. 177 (2009), 541–569. 3, 26, 28
[BB10] Julius Borcea and Petter Brändén, Multivariate Pólya–Schur classification problems in the Weyl algebra. Proc. Lond.
        Math. Soc. 101 (2010), no. 1, 73–104. 11, 29
[BBL09] Julius Borcea, Petter Brändén, and Thomas Liggett, Negative dependence and the geometry of polynomials. J. Amer.
        Math. Soc. 22 (2009), no. 2, 521–567. 5, 7, 11, 15, 17, 18, 31, 49, 55, 56
[Brä07] Petter Brändén, Polynomials with the half-plane property and matroid theory. Adv. Math. 216 (2007), no. 1, 302–320.
         3, 10, 21, 37, 56
[Brä10] Petter Brändén, Discrete concavity and the half-plane property, Siam J. Discrete Math. 24 (2010), 921–933. 4, 36, 38,
         41
[BH]     Petter Brändén and June Huh, Hodge–Riemann relations for Potts model partition functions. arXiv:1811.01696. 5,
         50
[Bru06] Richard Brualdi, Combinatorial matrix classes. Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications 108. Cambridge
       University Press, Cambridge, 2006. 40
[CRLMZ] Federico Castillo, Yairon Cid Ruiz, Binglin Li, Jonathan Montaño, and Naizhen Zhang, When are multidegrees
       positive? arXiv:2005.07808. 46
[COSW04] Youngbin Choe, James Oxley, Alan Sokal, and David Wagner, Homogeneous multivariate polynomials with the
       half-plane property. Adv. in Appl. Math. 32 (2004), no. 1-2, 88–187. 3, 7, 8, 21, 23, 29, 32
[DMS14] Claude Dellacherie, Servet Martinez, and Jaime San Martin, Inverse M-matrices and ultrametric matrices. Lecture
       Notes in Mathematics 2118. Springer, Cham, 2014. 51
[Dow80] Thomas Dowling, On the independent set numbers of a finite matroid. Combinatorics 79 (Proc. Colloq., Univ.
       Montrál, Montreal, Que., 1979), Part I. Ann. Discrete Math. 8 (1980), 21–28. 49
[EH20] Christopher Eur and June Huh, Logarithmic concavity for morphisms of matroids. Adv. in Math. 367 (2020), 107094.
       50
[FM92] Tomás Feder and Milena Mihail, Balanced matroids, Proceedings of the 24th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory
       of Computing, 26–38, ACM Press, 1992. 32
58                                         PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


[FK72] Cornelius Fortuin and Pieter Kasteleyn, On the random-cluster model. I. Introduction and relation to other models.
        Physica 57 (1972), 536–564. 47
[Fuj05] Satoru Fujishige, Submodular functions and optimization. Second edition. Annals of Discrete Mathematics 58.
        Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2005. 9
[Ful93] William Fulton, Introduction to toric varieties. Annals of Mathematics Studies 131. The William H. Roever Lec-
        tures in Geometry. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1993. 47
[Ful98] William Fulton, Intersection theory. Second edition. Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete 3, A
        Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics 2. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1998. 45, 46
[GKL] Pavel Galashin, Steven N. Karp, and Thomas Lam, The totally nonnegative Grassmannian is a ball.
        arXiv:1707.02010. 23
[GKL19] Pavel Galashin, Steven N. Karp, and Thomas Lam, The totally nonnegative part of G{P is a ball. Adv. in Math.
        351 (2019), 614–620. 23
[Gre81] Jiřı́ Gregor, On quadratic Hurwitz forms. I. Apl. Mat. 26 (1981), no. 2, 142–153. 8
[Gri06] Geoffrey Grimmett, The random-cluster model. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2006. 47
[GW04] Geoffrey Grimmett and Stephan Winkler, Negative association in uniform forests and connected graphs. Random
        Structures Algorithms 24 (2004), no. 4, 444–460. 5, 56
[Gur09] Leonid Gurvits, On multivariate Newton-like inequalities. Advances in combinatorial mathematics, 61–78,
        Springer, Berlin, 2009. 3, 23, 24, 47
[HS89] Yahya Ould Hamidoune and Isabelle Salaün, On the independence numbers of a matroid. J. Combin. Theory Ser. B
        47 (1989), no. 2, 146–152. 49
[Har77] Robin Hartshorne, Algebraic geometry. Graduate Texts in Mathematics 52. Springer-Verlag, New York-
        Heidelberg, 1977. 46
[Hei38] Rudolf Heine, Der Wertvorrat der gemischten Inhalte von zwei, drei und vier ebenen Eibereichen. Math. Ann. 115
        (1938), no. 1, 115–129. 47
[HH03] Jürgen Herzog and Takayuki Hibi, Discrete polymatroids. J. Algebraic Combin. 16 (2002), no. 3, 239–268. 9
[Hol05] Olga Holtz, M-matrices satisfy Newton’s inequalities. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 133 (2005), no. 3, 711–717. 5, 51
[HJ94] Roger Horn and Charles Johnson, Topics in matrix analysis. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1994. 52
[Huh18] June Huh, Combinatorial applications of the Hodge–Riemann relations. Proceedings of the International Congress
       of Mathematicians 3 (2018), 3079-3098. 15
[HK12] June Huh and Eric Katz, Log-concavity of characteristic polynomials and the Bergman fan of matroids. Math. Ann. 354
       (2012), 1103–1116. 49
[HSW] June Huh, Benjamin Schröter and Botong Wang, Correlation bounds for fields and matroids. arXiv:1806.02675.
       33, 49
[HW17] June Huh and Botong Wang, Enumeration of points, lines, planes, etc. Acta Math. 218 (2017), no. 2, 297–317. 5, 32,
       46
[HMMS] June Huh, Jacob P. Matherne, Karola Mészáros, and Avery St. Dizier, Logarithmic concavity of Schur and related
        polynomials. arXiv:1906.09633. 23, 30
[JL]    Chen Jiang and Zhiyuan Li, Algebraic reverse Khovanskii–Teissier inequality via Okounkov bodies.
        arXiv:2112.02847. 47
[Kah00] Jeff Kahn, A normal law for matchings. Combinatorica 20 (2000), no. 3, 339–391. 5, 56
[KN10] Jeff Kahn and Michael Neiman, Negative correlation and log-concavity. Random Structures Algorithms 37 (2010),
        no. 3, 367–388. 18, 49
[KN11] Jeff Kahn and Michael Neiman, A strong log-concavity property for measures on Boolean algebras. J. Combin. Theory
        Ser. A 118 (2011), no. 6, 1749–1760. 49
[Kar68] Samuel Karlin, Total positivity. Vol. I. Stanford University Press, Stanford, 1968. 30
[KMT07] Yusuke Kobayashi, Kazuo Murota, and Ken’ichiro Tanaka, Operations on M-convex functions on jump systems.
        SIAM. J. Discrete Math. 21 (2007), no.1, 107–129. 10, 40
                                               LORENTZIAN POLYNOMIALS                                                     59


[Laz04] Robert Lazarsfeld, Positivity in algebraic geometry. I. Classical setting: line bundles and linear series. Ergebnisse
        der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete 3. A Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics 48. Springer-Verlag,
        Berlin, 2004. 45, 46
[LX17] Brian Lehmann and Jian Xiao, Correspondences between convex geometry and complex geometry. Épijournal de
        Géométrie Algébrique 1 (2017), Article 6. 47
[Len13] Matthias Lenz, The f-vector of a representable-matroid complex is log-concave. Adv. in Appl. Math. 51 (2013), no. 5,
        543–545. 49
[LS81] Elliott Lieb and Alan Sokal, A general Lee–Yang theorem for one-component and multicomponent ferromagnets.
        Comm. Math. Phys. 80 (1981), no. 2, 153–179. 10
[Lig97] Thomas Liggett, Ultra log-concave sequences and negative dependence. J. Comb. Th. A 79 (1997), 315–325. 24
[Lig10] Thomas Liggett, Continuous time Markov processes. An introduction. Graduate Studies in Mathematics 113. Amer-
        ican Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2010. 31
[MS15] Diane Maclagan and Bernd Sturmfels, Introduction to tropical geometry. Graduate Studies in Mathematics 161.
        American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2015. 37, 38, 39, 41, 42
[Mah85] Carolyn Mahoney, On the unimodality of the independent set numbers of a class of matroids. J. Combin. Theory Ser.
        B 39 (1985), no. 1, 77–85. 49
[Mar02] David Marker, Model theory: An introduction. Graduate Texts in Mathematics 217. Springer, New York, 2002. 35
[Mar72] Thomas Markham, Nonnegative matrices whose inverses are M -matrices. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 36 (1972), 326–
        330. 54
[Mas72] John Mason, Matroids: unimodal conjectures and Motzkin’s theorem. Combinatorics (Proc. Conf. Combinatorial
        Math., Math. Inst., Oxford, 1972), 207–220, Inst. Math. Appl., Southend-on-Sea, 1972. 5, 49
[Men69] Korandattil Venugopalan Menon, On the convolution of logarithmically concave sequences. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.
        23 (1969), 439–441. 30
[Mur03] Kazuo Murota, Discrete convex analysis. SIAM Monographs on Discrete Mathematics and Applications. Society
        for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM), Philadelphia, 2003. 2, 4, 9, 18, 33, 34
[Nui68] Wim Nuij, A note on hyperbolic polynomials. Math. Scand. 23 (1968), 69–72. 7, 10, 13
[Oxl11] James Oxley, Matroid theory. Second edition. Oxford Graduate Texts in Mathematics 21. Oxford University Press,
        Oxford, 2011. 9, 48, 49
[Pem00] Robin Pemantle, Towards a theory of negative dependence. J. Math. Phys., 41, No. 3, (2000), 1371–1390. 55
[Pem12] Robin Pemantle, Hyperbolicity and stable polynomials in combinatorics and probability. Current developments in
        mathematics, 2011, 57–123, Int. Press, Somerville, MA, 2012. 7
[Pos09] Alexander Postnikov, Permutohedra, associahedra, and beyond. Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN 2009, no. 6, 1026–1106.
        9
[Sch14] Rolf Schneider, Convex bodies: the Brunn–Minkowski theory. Second expanded edition. Encyclopedia of Mathe-
        matics and its Applications 151. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2014. 43, 44
[Sch38] Isaac Jacob Schoenberg, Metric spaces and positive definite functions. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 44 (1938), 522–536.
        38
[Ser10] Denis Serre, Matrices. Theory and applications. Graduate Texts in Mathematics 216. Springer, New York, 2010. 25
[Sey75] Paul Seymour, Matroids, hypergraphs, and the max-flow min-cut theorem. Thesis, University of Oxford, 1975. 49
[SW75] Paul Seymour and Dominic Welsh, Combinatorial applications of an inequality from statistical mechanics. Math.
        Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 77 (1975), 485–495. 32, 49
[She60] Geoffrey Shephard, Inequalities between mixed volumes of convex sets. Mathematika 7 (1960), 125–138. 43, 47
[Shi12] Akiyoshi Shioura, Matroid rank functions and discrete concavity. Jpn. J. Ind. Appl. Math. 29 (2012), no. 3, 535–546.
        34
[Sok05] Alan Sokal, The multivariate Tutte polynomial (alias Potts model) for graphs and matroids. Surveys in combinatorics
        2005, 173–226, London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser. 327, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2005. 47
[Spe05] David Speyer, Horn’s problem, Vinnikov curves and hives. Duke Math. J. 127 (2005), 395–428. 35, 36
60                                         PETTER BRÄNDÉN AND JUNE HUH


[TV83] Aleksandr Timan and Igor Vestfrid, Any separable ultrametric space is isometrically embeddable in ℓ2 . Funktsional.
       Anal. i Prilozhen. 17 (1983), no. 1, 85–86. 38
[Wag05] David Wagner, Rank-three matroids are Rayleigh. Electron. J. Combin. 12 (2005), Note 8, 11 pp. 32
[Wag08] David Wagner, Negatively correlated random variables and Mason’s conjecture for independent sets in matroids. Ann.
       Comb. 12 (2008), no. 2, 211–239. 17, 49
[Wag11] David Wagner, Multivariate stable polynomials: theory and applications. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 48 (2011),
        no. 1, 53–84. 7, 11
[Wel76] Dominic Welsh, Matroid theory. London Mathematical Society Monographs 8. Academic Press, London-New
        York, 1976. 9
[Yau78] Shing Tung Yau, On the Ricci curvature of a compact Kähler manifold and the complex Monge–Ampère equation. I.
        Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 31 (1978), no. 3, 339–411. 47
[Zha85] Cui Kui Zhao, A conjecture on matroids. Neimenggu Daxue Xuebao 16 (1985), no. 3, 321–326. 49


     D EPARTMENT OF M ATHEMATICS , KTH, R OYAL I NSTITUTE OF T ECHNOLOGY, S TOCKHOLM , S WEDEN .
     Email address: pbranden@kth.se


     I NSTITUTE FOR A DVANCED S TUDY AND P RINCETON U NIVERSITY, P RINCETON , NJ, USA.


     K OREA I NSTITUTE FOR A DVANCED S TUDY, S EOUL , K OREA .
     Email address: junehuh@ias.edu
