                                                   There is no “Weil-”cohomology theory with real
                                                          coefficients for arithmetic curves

                                                                             Christopher Deninger∗




arXiv:2204.02714v2 [math.AG] 27 Jan 2023
                                           1       Weil cohomologies over Fp

                                           A well known argument by Serre shows that there is no Weil cohomology theory with real
                                           coefficients for smooth projective varieties over Fp . For such a cohomology theory and every
                                           elliptic curve E over Fp there would have to be an R-algebra anti-homomorphism

                                           1.1.     (End E) ⊗ R −→ End H 1 (E, R) ,

                                           However, if E is supersingular, then (End E)⊗Q is a quaternion algebra over Q which is non-
                                           split precisely at p and ∞. Thus (End E)⊗R would be the Hamilton quaternions H whereas
                                           End H 1 (E, R) = M2 (R), and there is no anti-homomorphism of R-algebras H → M2 (R). The
                                           algebras (End E) ⊗ Ql for l 6= p and (End E) ⊗ Qp are split, where Qp is the quotient field of
                                           W (Fp ), the (p-typical) Witt vector ring of Fp . Hence Serre’s argument does not contradict
                                           the existence of Weil cohomology theories with values in Ql resp. Qp . Indeed l-adic and
                                           crystalline cohomology are such theories. In particular, embedding Ql or Qp into C one sees
                                           that there is a Weil cohomology with values in C-vector spaces. Of course such embeddings
                                           are highly uncanonical. However, if the standard conjectures on algebraic cycles hold,
                                           there is a Weil-cohomology theory with values in Q. It would give a theory with complex
                                           coefficients after choosing an embedding Q ֒→ C, which is a more reasonable process than
                                           embedding Ql or Qp into C.
                                                                                                                              n
                                           In Scholze [15, Conjecture 9.5 ff] the existence of a Weil cohomology theory HKt     Q
                                                                                                                                  (X) for
                                           varieties X over Fp with values in Kottwitz’ category KtQ is conjectured, and assuming
                                           well known conjectures also proved. As yet, we have no indication that such a refined
                                           category as (the ind-category of KtQ) may be the target of our conjectural “Weil-”cohomology
                                           H n (spec ok , C) for arithmetic curves in the next section. However, the following much
                                           simpler R-linear abelian ⊗-category KR may be a target category. Its objects are Z/2-graded
                                               Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Ger-
                                               ∗

                                           many’s Excellence Strategy EXC 2044–390685587, Mathematics Münster: Dynamics–Geometry–Structure
                                           and the CRC 1442 Geometry: Deformations and Rigidity


                                                                                         1
C-vector spaces V = V0 ⊕ V1 with an antilinear isomorphism σ respecting the grading and
σ 2 = (−1)i on Vi . Morphisms are C-linear maps which respect the grading and commute
with σ. On V0 the involution σ defines the real structure V0σ=id , i.e. V0 = V0σ=id ⊗R C.
On V1 we obtain a quaternionic structure: The quaternions H = R ⊕ Ri ⊕ Rj ⊕ Rk act on
V1 by 1, i, j = σ and k = iσ, turning V1 into an H-vector space. Thus Serre’s argument
would not exclude a Weil cohomology theory H n with values in KR if H 1 (E) = H 1 (E)1 for
supersingular elliptic curves. In fact, as Milne pointed out to me, it follows directly from
Grothendieck’s standard conjectures that there exists a Weil cohomology with values in KR
- the conjectures imply that the motives over Fp form a polarized Tannakian category, to
which one can apply [1, Theorem 4.29]. He also remarked that this was likely known to
Grothendieck in the 1960s. Note that there are canonical ⊗-functors KtQ → KtR → KR ,
where Kottwitz’ category KtR is the same as the category V∞ in [11], Example 1.7.



2    “Weil-”cohomologies over spec Z

In several articles we discussed the possibility of a cohomology theory H n ( , C) with values
in C-vector spaces which is defined for all arithmetic schemes over spec Z and their arith-
metic compactifications. The theory should be equipped with functorial endomorphisms
θ whose eigenvalues would be the zeroes and poles of the corresponding zeta functions.
In particular the cohomology groups can be infinite dimensional. For arithmetic schemes
over spec Fp such a theory can be constructed by a formal process starting with l-adic co-
homology, c.f. [2, section 4]. The question arises whether a theory of this type can have
real coefficients. For arithmetic schemes which are not flat over spec Z the arguments in
[5, 4.7] make this improbable but for flat schemes over spec Z real coefficients remained a
theoretical possibility. In the following, we will explain why no real-valued theory of the
type conjectured in [4], [6] can exist, even for spectra of number rings. On the other hand,
a theory with values in KR refining the conjectural C-theory seems plausible. We begin by
recalling some of the discussion from [4], [6]. Let k/Q be a number field and let spec ok be
the arithmetic compactification of spec ok . The basic expected properties of H n (spec ok , C)
and its operator θ are the following:
2.1. θ is a derivation with respect to cup-product.
2.2. H 0 (spec ok , C) = C with θ = 0.
2.3. H 1 (spec ok , C) is infinite dimensional with the eigenvalues of θ being the non-trivial
zeroes of ζk (s) with their multiplicities. Here the eigenvalues α are counted with their
algebraic multiplicities dim H 1 (spec ok , C)θ∼α . Here
                    H θ∼α = {h ∈ H | (θ − α)n (h) = 0 for some n ≥ 1}
is the generalized α-eigenspace of θ.
2.4. There is a θ-equivariant trace isomorphism
                                    ∼
               tr : H 2 (spec ok , C) −
                                      → C(−1) where C(−1) = C with θ = id .

By 2.1 and 2.4, for h1 , h2 ∈ H 1 (spec ok , C) we would have

                                               2
2.5.    h1 ∪ h2 = θ(h1 ∪ h2 ) = θh1 ∪ h2 + h1 ∪ θh2 .

For h1 ∈ H 1 (spec ok , C)θ∼α and h2 ∈ H 1 (spec ok , C)θ∼β we have

                                h1 ∪ h2 ∈ H 2 (spec ok , C)θ∼α+β .

Hence h1 ∪ h2 6= 0 can only happen by 2.4 if α + β = 1 and we expect that:

2.6. the pairing
                                                                                tr
                                                                ∪               ∼
             ∪ : H 1 (spec ok , C)θ∼α × H 1 (spec ok , C)θ∼1−α −
                                                               → H 2 (spec ok , C) −
                                                                                   →C

is perfect. In particular, α is an eigenvalue of θ on H 1 if and only if 1 − α is an eigenvalue
and the (algebraic) multiplicities are equal. Note that via 2.3 this is compatible with the
functional equation of ζk (s).

Much more optimistically, one could hope for the following property.

2.7. There is a canononical anti-linear automorphism ∗ of H 1 (spec ok , C) with ∗2 = −id, ∗ ◦ θ =
θ ◦ ∗ and such that we get a scalar product by setting

                           hh, h′ i = tr(h ∪ ∗h′ ) on H 1 (spec ok , C) .


In particular α is then an eigenvalue of θ on H 1 if and only if α is an eigenvalue. Note that
2.5 and 2.7 imply the relation

                                  hh, h′ i = hθh, h′ i + hh, θh′ i .

Hence θ − 12 would be skew-symmetric on H 1 (spec ok , C) and its eigenvalues therefore purely
imaginary. Using 2.3 the Riemann hypotheses would follow. Of course this argument follows
the lead of Serre [16]. Also note that if 2.7 is true, skew-symmetry of θ − 21 would imply
that the algebraic eigenspaces H θ∼α of θ are the usual ones H θ=α .

The following heuristic argument suggests that property 2.7 may be more than whishful
thinking. In [8] we showed that higher dimensional analogues of 2.7 together with certain
Abel-Jacobi isomorphisms would imply Beilinson’s conjectures on the positivity of height
pairings. In particular, suitably normalized the Néron-Tate height pairing on E(Q) for an
elliptic curve E over Q would be the scalar product as in 2.7 restricted to the 1-eigenspace
of θ on the relevant cohomology group. We expect an Abel-Jacobi isomorphism to identify
E(Q) ⊗ C with this 1-eigenspace. Thus the same scalar product on cohomology whose
positivity would imply that all zeroes of L(E, s) lie on the line Re s = 1 would also imply
that the Néron-Tate height pairing on E(Q) is positive definite, c.f. [8] for the details.

For spec ok there is no natural known candidate of a C-vector space which might be isomor-
                         1
phic to H 1 (spec ok )θ∼ 2 via an Abel-Jacobi map. We will discuss this intriguing problem
below.

As a particular case of 2.3 we would get the formula

                                                  3
                                                     1
2.8.    ords=1/2 ζk (s) = dimC H 1 (spec ok , C)θ∼ 2 .

Note that if an antilinear involution ∗ on H 1 (spec ok , C) exists with ∗2 = −id and ∗ ◦ θ = θ ◦ ∗
                              1
then Vk = H 1 (spec ok , C)θ∼ 2 carries a quaternionic structure and hence it has even C-
dimension. Since the order of ζk (s) at s = 1/2 is even by the functional equation, this is
compatible with (2.8). Alternatively, the existence of the perfect alternating pairing 2.6 for
α = 1/2
2.9.    ∪ : Vk × Vk −→ C

would also imply that dim Vk is even.

Let us now assume that k/Q is Galois with group G. By contravariant functoriality of the co-
homology ring with derivation (H • (spec ok , C), ∪, θ) the group G would act on H 1 (spec ok , C)
and in particular on Vk . By the following argument kindly pointed out to me by Baptiste
Morin, it is natural to assume that G acts trivially on H 2 (spec ok , C) ∼
                                                                          = C, so that the pair-
ings 2.6 and in particular (2.9) would be G-invariant. Namely one may expect a natural
continuous G-equivariant homomorphism from the Arakelov Chow group:

(1)                          cl : CH 1 (spec ok ) −→ H 2 (spec ok , C) .

The map cl would send the compact kernel of the Arakelov degree map to zero since C has
no non-trivial compact subgroups. Hence cl would factor over the Arakelov degree map
and this would lead to a copy of R with trivial G-action inside of H 2 (spec ok , C). Hence G
would act trivially on the entire group.

For an equivalence class π of irreducible representations of G over C let eπ ∈ C[G]opp =
End G C[G] be the corresponding idempotent projecting to the π-isotypical component of
C[G]. For any complex vector space H on which G acts, eπ defines a projector and we set
H(π) = eπ H. For a realization Vπ of π consider the G-equivariant isomorphism:
                                             ∼
                                         → H(π) with f ⊗ v 7→ f (v) .
                      HomG (Vπ , H) ⊗ Vπ −

Since θ commutes with the G-action, it respects both H 1 (spec ok , C)(π) and the decompo-
sition                                      M
                        H 1 (spec ok , C) =   H 1 (spec ok , C)(π) .
                                                 π

Consider the G-isomorphism:
                                                         ∼
                    HomG (Vπ , H 1 (spec ok , C)) ⊗ Vπ −
                                                       → H 1 (spec ok , C)(π) .

It is compatible with θ if θ acts on the left as θ(f ⊗ v) = (θ ◦ f ) ⊗ v. In accordance with the
formula                          Y                    Y
                        ζk (s) =     L(C[G](π), s) =      L(Vπ , s)dim Vπ
                                    π                     π
we expect:
2.10. The eigenvalues α of θ on HomG (Vπ , H 1 (spec ok , C)) counted with their algebraic
multiplicities are the non-trivial zeroes of the Artin L-function L(Vπ , s) counted with mul-
tiplicity.

                                                  4
A corresponding assertion in the function field case is true, c.f. [10, § 9].
In particular, we would get
2.11.    dimC HomG (Vπ , H 1 (spec ok , C)θ∼α ) = ords=α L(Vπ , s) .

For α = 1/2 this amounts to the formula
2.12.    dimC HomG (Vπ , Vk ) = ords=1/2 L(Vπ , s) .
Theorem 2.13. For a number field k there is no functorial real valued cohomology theory
H • (spec ok , R) with endomorphism θR such that H • (spec ok , C) := H • (spec ok , R) ⊗R C with
θ := θR ⊗ id satisfies property 2.12.

Proof. Let k be a finite Galois extension of Q whose Galois group G has an irreducible
symplectic representation Vπ with root number W (π) = −1. For example, there exist
quaternion fields i.e. normal extensions of Q with Galois group the quaternion group H8
with 8 elements whose Artin L-function for the unique non-abelian representation (it is
symplectic) has root number −1. See [12] for examples of such fields. From the functional
equation of L(Vπ , s) it follows that ords=1/2 L(Vπ , s) ≥ 1 is odd. By property 2.12 the rep-
resentation Vπ occurs with odd multiplicity HomG (Vπ , Vk ) in Vk . If a theory H • (spec ok , R)
as in the theorem exists set
                                                             1
                                   VkR = H 1 (spec ok , R)θ∼ 2 .
Then VkR would be a G-module with Vk = VkR ⊗R C. and we could write VkR as a sum of
irreducible representations W of G over R. According to [17, 13.2] there are three possi-
bilities for W . If W has the form W = ResV for an irreducible non-self dual irreducible
representation V over C, then we would have W ⊗ C = V ⊕ V and since both V and
V are not self-dual they cannot be symplectic. If W is orthogonal then W ⊗ C is an ir-
reducible orthogonal C-representation and hence not symplectic. If W is symplectic i.e.
W = ResV for a symplectic irreducible representation V over C then W ⊗ C = V ⊕ V . It
follows that the symplectic representation Vπ occurs with even multiplicity in Vk . This is a
contradiction.

I would like to thank one of the referees for suggesting this simplification of my original
argument.
There is thus no real valued “Weil-”cohomology for arithmetic curves. On the other hand,
the operator ∗ in 2.7 would give a canonical quaternionic structure on H 1 (spec ok , C) and
hence we could view (H 1 (spec ok , C), ∗) as an object of KR, equal to its degree 1 part. The
groups H 0 and H 2 being isomorphic to C by 2.2 and 2.4 must be equal to their degree
zero parts if they actually take values in KR. In other words, they must have natural
real structures. For H 2 the real structure would be the image of the cycle class map (1)
in Morin’s heuristic argument above. We noted that cl would have to factorize over the
Arakelov degree map onto R.
Hence, a “Weil-”cohomology theory with values in KR is a possibility for arithmetic curves.
In [6], [7] we discussed analogies between the leafwise (or tangential) cohomology of certain
foliated dynamical systems and cohomologies such as the hoped for H 1 (spec ok , C). The

                                                 5
operator θ corresponds to the infinitesimal generator of the induced R-action by the flow
on leafwise cohomology. Complex leafwise cohomology always has the real structure given
by the cohomology of the real forms. Since such a real structure cannot exist on the
cohomologies H 1 (spec ok , C) as we have seen, it follows that the analogy is too simple. There
has to be a twisted version of leafwise cohomology with complex coefficients that does not
have a natural real structure. This can become relevant since in [9] we did construct foliated
dynamical systems for arithmetic schemes which have some (but not all) the expected
properties.
We will now state the expected properties of the spaces Vk = H 1 (spec ok , C)θ∼1/2 and suggest
the problem to find a direct number theoretical construction of the Vk . This refines the
discussion in [3, § 7]. We need the following conjecture which is due to Serre (unpublished).
Sarnak and Rubinstein also arrived at this conjecture in a wider context on p. 195 of [14].
Previously Chowla had conjectured that the Dirichlet L-series of quadratic characters do
not vanish at s = 1/2.
Vanishing Conjecture For an irreducible complex representation of the Galois group of
Q the corresponding Artin L-function has a zero at s = 1/2 if and only if the representation
is symplectic with root number −1. In this case the order of vanishing is one.
If the root number is −1, the functional equation implies that the Artin L-function vanishes
at s = 1/2. For orthogonal irreducible representations it is known that the root number is
+1 by [10]. Hence there is no a priori reason why their L-functions should vanish at s = 1/2.
For certain quaternion fields the vanishing conjecture has been verified numerically in [12].
If k/Q is Galois, it follows from 2.12 and the vanishing conjecture that precisely the sym-
plectic π’s with W (π) = −1 among the irreducible representations of G are realized in the
G-module Vk and each of them with multiplicity one. Thus, as C[G]-modules we should
have
               L
2.14. Vk =         π sympl Vk (π) and Vk (π) ∼ = Vπ .
                  W (π)=−1



Since the Vk (π) are irreducible self dual and pairwise non-isomorphic, it would follow that
the cup-product on Vk gives the (up to scalar) unique G-invariant symplectic pairing on
Vk (π).
All together we get the following suggestion:
 2.15. There should be a covariant functor k 7→ (Vk , ∪) from the category of number
fields k to the category of finite dimensional complex vector spaces Vk with a non-degenerate
alternating form ∪ : Vk × Vk → C. If k is Galois over Q with group G, the C[G]-module
structure on Vk resulting from functoriality should be the one described in 2.14. In particular,
we should have                                  X
                                    dimC Vk =        dim Vπ .
                                              π sympl
                                             W (π)=−1

Moreover, we expect the symplectic vector spaces (Vk , ∪) to be equipped with an antilinear
isomorphism ∗ : Vk → Vk with ∗2 = −1 such that we obtain a scalar product by setting
                               hv, wi = v ∪ ∗w      for v, w ∈ Vk .
Like height pairings, the symplectic form ∪ should be a sum of local contributions.

                                                6
In case a natural candidate for Vk can be found, one may also expect a formula for the leading
coefficient of ζk (s) at s = 1/2 in the style of the Birch Swinnerton-Dyer or Lichtenbaum
Weil-étale conjectures. From the point of view of the Beilinson conjectures, Vk would be
the 1/2-eigenspace of the Adams operators on K0 (k), or the CH 1/2 group of spec k or the
group of extensions Ext1 (C(0), C(1/2)) in some C-linear category of “motives” over k where
a 1/2-twist of the Tate motive exists. Classically all these objects do not make sense in the
number field case. In the function field case the H 1 of a supersingular elliptic curve over
a finite field can be used as a kind of 1/2-Tate twist, c.f.[13]. In the Galois module theory
of rings of integers in tamely ramified extensions k/Q, symplectic representations with root
number −1 play a vital role. Also, exponential motives come to mind because they allow
non-integral twists.
Acknowledgements. I would like to thank the referees for their suggestions to simplify
and improve this note. I am also grateful to Luca Barbieri Viale, Werner Bley, James
Milne, Baptiste Morin, Peter Sarnak and Jean-Pierre Serre for valuable mathematical and
historical comments. Many thanks go to Umberto Zannier for the invitation to the SNS in
Pisa, where the first version of this note was written.



References
 [1] P. Deligne and J. S. Milne. Tannakian Categories, pages 101–228. Springer Berlin
     Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1982.
 [2] Christopher Deninger. Motivic L-functions and regularized determinants. In Motives
     (Seattle, WA, 1991), volume 55 of Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., pages 707–743. Amer.
     Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1994.
 [3] Christopher Deninger. Motivic L-functions and regularized determinants. II. In Arith-
     metic geometry (Cortona, 1994), Sympos. Math., XXXVII, pages 138–156. Cambridge
     Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1997.
 [4] Christopher Deninger. Some analogies between number theory and dynamical systems
     on foliated spaces. In Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians,
     Vol. I (Berlin, 1998), number Extra Vol. I, pages 163–186, 1998.
 [5] Christopher Deninger. On dynamical systems and their possible significance for arith-
     metic geometry. In Regulators in analysis, geometry and number theory, volume 171
     of Progr. Math., pages 29–87. Birkhäuser Boston, Boston, MA, 2000.
 [6] Christopher Deninger. Number theory and dynamical systems on foliated spaces.
     Jahresber. Deutsch. Math.-Verein., 103(3):79–100, 2001.
 [7] Christopher Deninger. Analogies between analysis on foliated spaces and arithmetic
     geometry. In Groups and analysis, volume 354 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser.,
     pages 174–190. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2008.
 [8] Christopher Deninger. The Hilbert-Polya strategy and height pairings. In Casimir
     force, Casimir operators and the Riemann hypothesis, pages 275–283. Walter de
     Gruyter, Berlin, 2010.

                                              7
 [9] Christopher Deninger.       Dynamical systems for arithmetic schemes,          2022.
     arXiv:1807.06400.

[10] A. Fröhlich and J. Queyrut. On the functional equation of the Artin L-function for
     characters of real representations. Invent. Math., 20:125–138, 1973.

[11] J. S. Milne. Motives over finite fields. In Motives (Seattle, WA, 1991), volume 55 of
     Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., pages 401–459. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1994.

[12] Sami Omar. On Artin L-functions for octic quaternion fields. Experiment. Math.,
     10(2):237–245, 2001.

[13] Niranjan Ramachandran. Values of zeta functions at s = 1/2. Int. Math. Res. Not.,
     (25):1519–1541, 2005.

[14] Michael Rubinstein and Peter Sarnak. Chebyshev’s bias. Experiment. Math., 3(3):173–
     197, 1994.

[15] Peter Scholze. p-adic geometry. In Proceedings of the International Congress of
     Mathematicians—Rio de Janeiro 2018. Vol. I. Plenary lectures, pages 899–933. World
     Sci. Publ., Hackensack, NJ, 2018.

[16] Jean-Pierre Serre. Analogues kählériens de certaines conjectures de Weil. Ann. of
     Math. (2), 71:392–394, 1960.

[17] Jean-Pierre Serre. Linear representations of finite groups. Graduate Texts in Math-
     ematics, Vol. 42. Springer-Verlag, New York-Heidelberg, 1977. Translated from the
     second French edition by Leonard L. Scott.




                                            8
